Abstract
Background
Imaging of glioblastoma patients after maximal safe resection and chemoradiation commonly demonstrates new enhancements that raise concerns about tumor progression. However, in 30% to 50% of patients, these enhancements primarily represent the effects of treatment, or pseudo-progression (PsP). We hypothesize that quantitative machine learning analysis of clinically acquired multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (mpMRI) can identify subvisual imaging characteristics to provide robust, noninvasive imaging signatures that can distinguish true progression (TP) from PsP.

Methods
We evaluated independent discovery (n = 40) and replication (n = 23) cohorts of glioblastoma patients who underwent second resection due to progressive radiographic changes suspicious for recurrence. Deep learning and conventional feature extraction methods were used to extract quantitative characteristics from the mpMRI scans. Multivariate analysis of these features revealed radiophenotypic signatures distinguishing among TP, PsP, and mixed response that compared with similar categories blindly defined by board-certified neuropathologists. Additionally, interinstitutional validation was performed on 20 new patients.

Results
Patients who demonstrate TP on neuropathology are significantly different (P < .0001) from those with PsP, showing imaging features reflecting higher angiogenesis, higher cellularity, and lower water concentration. The accuracy of the proposed signature in leave-one-out cross-validation was 87% for predicting PsP (area under the curve [AUC], 0.92) and 84% for predicting TP (AUC, 0.83), whereas in the discovery/replication cohort, the accuracy was 87% for predicting PsP (AUC, 0.84) and 78% for TP (AUC, 0.80). The accuracy in the interinstitutional cohort was 75% (AUC, 0.80).

Conclusion
Quantitative mpMRI analysis via machine learning reveals distinctive noninvasive signatures of TP versus PsP after treatment of glioblastoma. Integration of the proposed method into clinical studies can be performed using the freely available Cancer Imaging Phenomics Toolkit.

Introduction
Glioblastoma is the most common malignant primary adult brain tumor.1 It is associated with a poor prognosis, with median overall survival ranging from 16 to 20 months despite maximal treatment.2-4 Initial treatment of glioblastoma involves a combined approach of maximal safe surgical resection and adjuvant chemoradiation.3 Surveillance of patients after completion of this initial treatment relies heavily on follow-up serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to detect disease recurrence. As such, distinguishing treatment-induced MRI changes from true progression (TP) of a tumor has critical implications to clinical decision making.

Unfortunately, standardization of radiographic metrics for treatment response and for determining disease progression in glioblastoma has proven quite difficult. The widespread variance in definitions of the terms progressive disease and stable disease led to the development of the Macdonald criteria in 1990, which rely upon crude radiographic measurement of areas of contrast enhancement on posttreatment MRI.5 With the addition of temozolomide to the standard of care, clinicians soon determined that these criteria were unable to accurately distinguish between TP and the effects of treatment, and the phenomenon of pseudo-progression (PsP) was thus identified. PsP is a subacute treatment-related effect that usually occurs within 3 months of completion of chemoradiation6, 7 and has imaging characteristics that mimic TP as defined by the Macdonald criteria.5

The diagnosis of PsP is usually made on the basis of spontaneous improvement or stabilization of imaging findings over several months (ie, in the setting of continuation of the chemotherapy for at least 6 months). Previous studies have suggested that nearly half (30%-50%) of glioblastoma patients with worsened radiographic findings after standard chemoradiation have PsP rather than TP.7-14 Because traditional MRI cannot reliably distinguish TP from PsP, clinicians who care for patients with glioblastoma must frequently choose between declaring TP (and therefore modifying the patient's current therapy) versus proceeding with invasive brain surgery for diagnostic clarity. On histopathologic analysis, such surgeries may reveal recurrent glioblastoma tumor, therapy-related changes (ie, PsP), or a combination of the two.

The Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (RANO) Working Group developed new criteria15 to address some of the limitations of the Macdonald criteria. As clinicians recognized the high prevalence of PsP in the months immediately after completion of chemoradiation, subtle changes in posttreatment imaging are no longer deemed to represent progressive disease, unless there is evidence of clinical deterioration or obvious new disease outside of the treatment field. This classification allows patients to continue maintenance therapy safely, with the goal of achieving some delayed improvement. Nonetheless, some of these patients do actually show TP, and identifying these patients without tissue sampling would allow for earlier change in therapy.

The goal of this study was to noninvasively evaluate radiographic changes in glioblastoma patients treated with chemoradiation by multivariate analysis of preoperative, multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) to identify a radiophenotypic signature to distinguish between TP, mixed response, and PsP. Analysis of radiographic data via advanced computational analytics has been increasingly shown to provide rich and highly informative characterizations of glioblastoma and its surrounding brain tissue,11, 16-21 extending the evaluation of tissue properties beyond the capabilities of human visual interpretation. We hypothesize that quantification of subtle yet spatially complex quantitative imaging phenomic (QIP) features extracted from mpMRI can facilitate noninvasive classification of TP versus PsP with sufficient sensitivity and specificity to allow discrimination on an individual patient basis.

Materials and Methods
Study Patient Population
The study population was identified on the basis of retrospective review of the electronic medical record of patients diagnosed with glioblastoma at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania between 2011 and 2015. The criteria for inclusion comprised 1) initial gross total resection of the tumor followed by standard radiation therapy and temozolomide chemotherapy, 2) demonstration of new/increasing enhancement areas on follow-up MRI within 6 months after completion of radiation therapy, 3) second resection for histopathological tissue evaluation, and 4) acquisition of mpMRI within 15 days prior to the second resection. We identified 63 patients (men, n = 38; women, n = 25; mean age, 57.28 years [range, 32.79-81.60 years]) satisfying these inclusion criteria, and we randomly divided them into independent discovery (n = 40 [23 TP, 6 PsP, 11 mixed response]) and replication (n = 23 [12 TP, 4 PsP, 7 mixed response]) cohorts. Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) was wild-type, mutant, and not otherwise specified for 52, 2, and 9 patients, respectively (Supporting Table S1). This study was approved by the institutional review board of the University of Pennsylvania and was compliant with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.

Histopathological Tissue Evaluation
After resection, the surgically extracted tissue specimens were entirely fixed in 10% buffered formalin, routinely processed, and embedded in paraffin. Five-micrometer-thick sections of each specimen were cut onto glass slides, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and assessed by 2 board-certified neuropathologists (M.P.N., M.M.-L.) (blinded to our imaging assessment and the other rater) for presence of apparent tumor features and reactive treatment-related changes.11 The presence or absence of pseudo-palisading necrosis and microvascular proliferation (which are features of recurrent glioblastoma), the presence or absence of dystrophic calcification and vascular hyalinization, and the percentage of geographic necrosis (representative of treatment-related changes) were quantified (Fig. 1). Proliferative activity was determined by quantification of the number of mitotic figures in 10 high-power fields and semiquantitative assessment of Ki-67 proliferative index by immunostaining (mouse monoclonal, MIB-1, IR62661; Dako, Carpinteria, California). Based on the combined assessment of these features, the entire resected specimen was assigned a score between 1 and 6 (1 = <10%, 2 = 10%-25%, 3 = 25%-50%, 4 = 50%-75%, 5 = 75%-90%, and 6 = >90% malignant features). A score of 1-2 was defined as PsP, 3-4 as a mixture of TP and PsP, and 5-6 as TP. PsP (score 1-2) may continue the treatment as it was before. The mixture of TP and PsP (score 3-4) may change the treatment or continue the current treatment based on clinical status of the patient. The TP patients (score 5-6) may be recommended for repeat resection. We used linear weighted Cohen's kappa to calculate the interrater agreement.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Histological features of (A, B) true progression (malignant tumor) and (C-F) pseudo-progression (treatment-related effects). (A) Highly cellular tumor with pseudo-palisading necrosis and microvascular proliferation (arrow). (B) Mitotically active cellular tumor with microvascular proliferation (mitoses are indicated by arrows). (C) Thickened hyalinized vessel walls with focal lymphocytic inflammation and macrophages (arrow). (D) Dystrophic calcification. (E) Hyalinized vessels, lymphocytes, macrophages and hemosiderin-laden macrophages. (F) Geographic necrosis. Scale bar = 200 μm (A, C-F) and 100 μm (B).
MRI Acquisition Protocol
All MRI scans were performed on a Magnetom Tim Trio 3 Tesla scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using a 12-channel phased array head coil. Routine sequences included axial T1-weighted (T1): matrix = 192 × 256 × 192, resolution = 0.98 × 0.98 × 1.00 mm3, repetition time (TR) = 1760 ms; echo time (TE) = 3.1 ms; T1-weighted contrast enhanced with gadolinium (T1-Gd): matrix = 192 × 256 × 192, resolution = 0.98 × 0.98 × 1.00, TR = 1760 ms, TE = 3.1 ms; T2-weighted (T2): matrix = 208 × 256 × 64, resolution = 0.94 × 0.94 × 3.00, TR = 4680 ms, TE = 85 ms; T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (T2-FLAIR): matrix = 192 × 256 × 60, resolution = 0.94 × 0.94 × 3.00, TR = 9420 ms, TE = 141 ms; and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI): matrix = 128 × 128 × 40, resolution = 1.72 × 1.72 × 3.00 in 30 gradient directions, from which fractional anisotropy (DTI-FA), radial diffusivity (DTI-RAD), axial diffusivity (DTI-AX), and trace (DTI-TR) maps were calculated. The parameters for dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI (DSC-MRI) were as follows: field of view = 22 cm, matrix = 128 × 128 × 20, resolution = 1.72 × 1.72 × 3 mm3, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 45 ms. The DSC-MRI sequences were acquired as follows: After an initial loading dose of 3 mL MultiHance (gadobenate dimeglumine) was administered to reduce the effect of contrast agent leakage, and another bolus injection was given after 5 minutes with the remaining dose (for a total of 0.3 mL/kg or 1.5 times single dose) during image acquisition (15 patients). With the evolution of clinical protocols, dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE, also known as permeability) acquisitions have been routinely obtained on more recent studies. In these instances, DCE is obtained first with half of the total contrast and serves as the loading dose to reduce the effect of contrast agent leakage, followed by an additional bolus after a similar delay with the second half of the total contrast volume for the DSC acquisition (total 0.3 mL/kg, 48 patients).

MRI Preprocessing
All MRI volume scans of each individual patient were affinely coregistered intrapatient using the Functional MRI of the Brain Software Library (FSL).22 Subsequently all scans were smoothed to remove any high frequency intensity variations (ie, noise),23 corrected for magnetic field inhomogeneities24 and skull-stripped using FSL BET25 followed by manual revision when needed. We extracted commonly used measurements26 from the acquired DTI volumes (ie, DTI-TR, DTI-AX, DTI-RAD, DTI-FA). The DSC-MRI volumes were used to computationally extract parametric brain maps of the relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV), peak height (PH), and percentage signal recovery (PSR) after considering leakage correction.27, 28 In addition, all DSC curves were aligned/normalized interpatient for baseline and maximum drop. Principal component analysis (PCA) was also employed to extract a summarized signal of the complete temporal perfusion dynamics encapsulated in the DSC-MRI modality, instead of using isolated measurements such as the rCBV.29 Finally, the machine learning approach we adapted considers all 4 structural MRI images (T1, T1-Gd, T2, T2-FLAIR), the subtraction of T1 from T1-Gd and T2-FLAIR from T2 (following intensity normalization), 4 DTI-derived measurements, perfusion-derived PCA volumes, and isolated perfusion-derived parametric brain maps. We refer to these image volumes collectively as mpMRI.

Defining Target Tissue
To define the target region of interest (ROI), we first registered the pre- and postoperative images of the time point suspicious for TP using Deformable Registration via Attribute Matching and Mutual-Saliency Weighting (DRAMMS) software.30 We then delineated the ROI describing the resected tissue. The regions in the presurgery images that correspond to the resected tissue in postsurgery images was defined as ROI. Therefore, the imaging properties and the pathology features corresponded to the same resected region. Following the definition of these ROIs, all mpMRI sequences were analyzed to extract relevant comprehensive QIP features from the corresponding ROIs to create our predictive model.

Feature Extraction
Considering the complexity of the problem our model attempts to address, we used 2 distinct approaches to ensure the comprehensiveness of the extracted QIP features from the mpMRI volumes, and hence that they describe all aspects of the radiographic appearance. The 2 approaches were distinctively based on deep learning and a priori selected (APS) feature extraction. We used and evaluated these approaches both in combination and in comparison (Fig. 2).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Processing pipeline of the proposed radiomic analysis. Top row (imaging): 1. T1-w pre- and postcontrast, T2-w, T2-FLAIR, diffusion tensor imaging, and dynamic susceptibility contrast magnetic resonance images are acquired. 2. Defining the resected enhancing tissues after registration of the preoperative with postoperative images using Deformable Registration via Attribute Matching and Mutual-Saliency Weighting (DRAMMS) software. 3. Features are extracted from each region, quantifying intensity, shape, principal component analysis, statistics, and texture. 4. Features analysis and classification between pseudo-progression (PsP) versus non-PsP and true progression (TP) versus non-TP. Bottom row (pathology): 1. Excisional biopsy. 2. Histological analysis. 3. Histological characteristics. 4. Pathology scores. Abbreviations: DSC-MRI, dynamic susceptibility contrast magnetic resonance imaging; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; Gd, gadolinium; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PH, peak height; PsP, pseudo-progression; TP, true progression; TR, repetition time.
Deep Learning Features
To obtain the deep learning features, we used a pretrained neural network31, 32 and adapted a convolutional neural network (CNN) model pretrained on 1.2 million 3-channel images of the ImageNet LSVRC-2010 for classifying real-world images into different classes.31 The exact CNN model we used (imagenet_vgg_f31) was provided by the VLfeat library32 as part of their MatLab toolbox (MatConvNet) for computer vision applications. This CNN is a type of deep feed forward neural network that uses multilayer perceptrons with hidden layers. The hidden layers of CNN comprise convolutional (ie, cross-correlation) layers, pooling layers, fully connected layers, and normalization layers.33, 34 The convolution layer, which makes CNNs different from other types of deep neural networks, is a main layer of CNN and consists of several adaptive filters (as kernels) with small receptive fields. To apply this pretrained model in our data, we created 7 artificial 3-channel images, each channel of which describes an individual sequence from all the mpMRI images considered (Supporting Table S2).

APS Radiomic Features
We extracted 1040 APS radiomic features using the Cancer Imaging Phenomics Toolkit (www.cbica.upenn.edu/captk).35 Specifically, the features extracted describe the first-order statistical distribution of voxel intensities within each ROI (comprising mean, median, maximum, minimum, skewness, and standard deviation) in all mpMRI sequences, the PCA summarized signal of the intensity distribution histogram of each mpMRI sequence, and texture features (second-order statistics) based on gray-level cooccurrence matrix (GLCM)36 and gray-level run length matrix (GLRLM).37 To obtain these texture features in 3 dimensions, all mpMRI volumes were first quantized to 16 gray levels within the ROI. GLCM and GLRLM were then populated by taking 13 main directions into account. A neighborhood of 3 × 3 × 3 was considered for GLCM. These features were first computed for each direction independently and then averaged to find their final value. All features were rescaled via z score normalization before machine learning analysis. To identify which of these 1040 extracted features had actual predictive value, we applied a sequential feature selection in the training data until convergence based on a threshold in the accuracy improvement.

Classification and Correlation Approach
A multivariate pattern classification method known as Support Vector Machines (SVM) was used to construct 2 classifiers to predict TP/PsP; 1 classifier to distinguish between PsP (scores 1-2) versus everything else (scores 3-6), and another classifier to distinguish between TP (scores 5-6) versus everything else (scores 1-4). We conducted this multivariate analysis through linear configuration of SVM. The parameter for the soft margin cost function (C) was optimized on the training data, based on a 5-fold cross-validated grid search; C = 2α, where αϵ[−5,5]. This parameter controls the influence of each individual support vector that involves a trading error penalty for stability. These classifiers were trained separately for each classification task, and each time 1 of the 2 types of features was used (ie, deep learning and APS features). The classifiers were trained on the discovery cohort (n = 40) and tested on the replication cohort (n = 23). To confirm the robustness, accuracy, and generalizability of the proposed method in a larger cohort while avoiding optimistically biased estimates of performance, we also evaluated the classifiers in all 63 patients using a leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) schema, where in every iteration of cross-validation, the features were selected using data of n-1 patients and tested on the left-out nth patient. All steps including feature selection and model development were performed through cross-validation.

In addition to identifying a noninvasive signature to distinguish between TP and PsP, we also tried to find the correlations between the APS features and the histopathologic characteristics of the resected tissue specimen. This approach should identify complementary information of the extracted features by their correlations with pathological evaluations and quantitative scores. To achieve this, we used all 63 patients and trained separate support vector regression (SVR) models in a LOOCV configuration for the histopathologic characteristics with continuous values (ie, mitotic figures, Ki-67, geographic necrosis, and the overall histopathology score) and SVM classification models for the histopathologic characteristics with discrete/binary values (ie, pseudo-palisading necrosis, microvascular proliferation, dystrophic calcification, and vascular hyalinization) (Fig. 3).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Histopathologic characteristics versus machine learning estimations. The gray bands in the scatter plots represent 95% CIs for the regression lines.
Interinstitutional Validation
We evaluated our method on an independent testing cohort from a different institute and with different acquisition protocols (n = 20 patients [10 TP, 10 PsP]). In particular, we trained the model on the dataset acquired from the University of Pennsylvania and applied the model on an independent cohort acquired from Thomas Jefferson University. Due to the lack of diffusion tensor imaging in the Thomas Jefferson University dataset, we created a model using structural, DSC perfusion and apparent diffusion coefficient imaging sequences from University of Pennsylvania and tested the model on Thomas Jefferson University. Due to lack of pathology, the follow-up serial MRI examinations were used to confirm prediction of PsP and TP by a board-certified neuroradiologist (M.B.). We selected time points that are distinct from therapy changes (systemic therapy and radiation therapy), to reduce the probability of treatment-related changes being measured on the scans. All MRI scans were performed on a 1.5-Tesla GE Signa HDx scanner (General Electric, Milwaukee, Wisconsin) using an 8-channel phased array head coil. Routine sequences included T1: matrix = 256(4) or 512(16) × 256(4) or 512(16) × 15-30, resolution = 0.39-0.86 × 0.39-0.86 × 6-10 mm3, TR = 12.9-583.3 ms, TE = 4.1-12 ms; T1-Gd: matrix = 512 × 512 × 22-130, resolution = 0.43-0.57 × 0.43-0.57 × 1.5(18) or 7.5(2), TR = 516.7-600, TE = 7.9-12 ms; T2: matrix = 512 × 512 × 20-30, resolution = 0.39-0.49 × 0.39-0.49 × 5, TR = 2466.7-5952 ms, TE = 90.7-102.1 ms; T2-FLAIR: matrix = 512 × 512 × 20-30, resolution = 0.39-0.47 × 0.39-0.47 × 6(14) or 6.5(4) or 7.5(2), TR = 10000-10015 ms, TE = 126-148.5 ms; ADC: matrix = 256 × 256 × 30-37, resolution = 0.93(1) or 1.02(19) × 0.93(1) or 1.02(19) × 5, TR = 8000-10,000 ms, TE = 76.8-101 ms; DSC-MRI: field of view = 22 cm(17) or 24 cm(3), matrix = 128 × 128 × 15-27, resolution = 1.7(16) or 1.9(3) × 1.7(16) or 1.9(3) × 6(2) or 8(14) or 10(3), TR = 9-22.4 ms, TE = 400-2000 ms.

Results
The imaging information captured using both methods was multivariately integrated via SVM to build 2 classification models: TP versus non-TP (mixed response + PsP) and PsP versus non-PsP (mixed response + TP). Table 1 provides a summary of these results. We used linear-weighted Cohen's kappa to calculate interrater agreement. The observed agreement (po) for pathological scores of 1-6 was 0.9103 with random agreement (pe) of 0.6562, Cohen's kappa = 0.7392, and kappa error = 0.1091. The observed agreement (po) for PsP/Mix/TP was 0.9138 with random agreement (pe) of 0.6231, Cohen's kappa = 0.7713, and kappa error = 0.0978.

Table 1. Quantitative Evaluation Results
 	PsP vs Non-PsP	TP vs Non-TP
Accuracy, %	AUC	Sensitivity, %	FNR, %	Specificity, %	FPR, %	Accuracy, %	AUC	Sensitivity, %	FNR, %	Specificity, %	FPR, %
Deep learning features (hold-out set)	87.50	0.811	60.00	40	94.74	5.26	78.26	0.867	83.33	16.67	72.73	27.27
APS features (hold-out set)	86.96	0.842	75.00	25	89.47	10.53	78.26	0.803	83.33	16.67	72.73	27.27
APS features (LOOCV)	87.30	0.919	80.00	20	88.68	11.32	84.13	0.835	80.00	20	89.29	10.71
Combined features (hold-out set)	69.57	0.776	75.00	25	68.42	31.58	78.26	0.712	83.33	16.67	72.73	27.27
Abbreviations: APS, a priori selected; AUC, area under the curve; FNR, false negative rate; FPR, false positive rate; LOOCV, leave-one-out cross-validation; PsP, pseudo-progression; TP, true progression.
Using Deep Learning Features
The results were similar when using the deep learning features, which concluded in extracting >28,000 features. Specifically, the classification performance was evaluated on the independent discovery and replication cohorts, and the accuracy for the PsP versus non-PsP model was 87.50% (sensitivity = 60.00%, specificity = 94.74%, area under the curve [AUC] = 0.8105) while the accuracy for the TP versus non-TP model was 78.26% (sensitivity = 83.33%, specificity = 72.73%, AUC = 0.8636) (Fig. 4, Table 1).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Receiver operating characteristic curves of different experiments for pseudo-progression (PsP) versus non-PsP (left column) and true progression (TP) versus non-TP (right column). First row: deep learning (hold-out set). Second row: a priori selected (APS) features (hold-out set). Third row: APS features (leave-one-out cross-validation). Fourth row: combined features (hold-out set). Vertical axes represent the true positive rate; horizontal axes represent the false positive rate. Asterisks represent the shortest distance from the top left point.
Using APS Features
The PsP and TP models developed on the discovery cohort when applied to the replication cohort returned an accuracy of 86.96% (sensitivity = 75.00%, specificity = 89.47%) and 78.26% (sensitivity = 83.33%, specificity = 72.73%), respectively. A receiver operating characteristic analysis also resulted in an AUC of 0.84 and 0.80 for the PsP versus non-PsP and TP versus non-TP (Fig. 4) models, respectively. While using only the APS radiomic features, the accuracy of our model using LOOCV in the pooled cohort was equal to 87.30% (sensitivity = 80.00%, specificity = 88.68%, AUC = 0.9189) for PsP versus non-PsP and 84.13% (sensitivity = 80.00%, specificity = 89.29%, AUC = 0.8347) for TP versus non-TP confirming its generalizability (Fig. 4, Table 1). The most distinctive features for these classifiers can be found in Supporting Table 3.

Integrating Deep Learning and APS Features
In addition to comparing the performance of each feature, we also evaluated the performance of their integration (Fig. 4, Table 1). Specifically, when combining these features, the accuracy for the PsP versus non-PsP model was equal to 69.57% (sensitivity = 75.00%, specificity = 68.42%, AUC, 0.7763) and for the TP versus non-TP was 78.26% (sensitivity = 83.33%, specificity = 72.73%, AUC, 0.7121).

Histopathologic Characteristics Versus Machine Learning Estimates
The Pearson correlation coefficients between the SVR scores and logarithm of mitotic figures, logarithm of Ki-67, and geographic necrosis were estimated to be 0.54, 0.53, and 0.51, respectively. The Pearson correlation coefficients between the SVR scores and pathology scores was 0.76 (Fig. 3). We also evaluated the trained SVM models for the presence or absence of pseudo-palisading necrosis (AUC = 0.7434), microvascular proliferation (AUC = 0.7406), dystrophic calcification (AUC = 0.8292), and vascular hyalinization (AUC = 0.7939) (Fig. 3).

Biologically Interpreted Features
In our attempt to understand the underlying biological processes that are likely to give rise to the imaging signature of TP, we performed a detailed histogram analysis of all the imaging features. The Cohen's d effect sizes were as follows: T1, 0.6477; normalized T1-Gd, 0.3103; FLAIR, 0.2599; rCBV, 0.2829; PH, 0.2907; PSR, 0.5020; TR, 0.1442; and FA, 0.3319 for the difference between TP and PsP tumors. Figure 5 shows the imaging characteristics of PsP (dashed lines) and TP (solid lines) in each modality across all patients. The main results of comparing the QIP features of TP with those of PsP patients identified TP tumors as having the following characteristics:
regions of higher blood volume and flow, which points toward hypervascularity, hyperperfusion, and increased angiogenesis, based on the combination of rCBV and PH;
regions of higher cellularity, suggestive of increased proliferation, as well as different tissue microarchitecture, based on the combination of measures extracted from DTI, namely DTI-TR and DTI-FA;
regions of more compromised blood–brain barrier, based on the combination of measures extracted from T1-Gd and T1-Gd subtracted T1, also consistent with infiltrating tumor characteristics; and
regions of lower water concentration, based on the combination of T2-FLAIR and DTI-TR, consistent with dense and nonnecrotic tissue.
Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
(A) Two examples of the imaging modalities in pseudo-progression (PsP) and true progression (TP) patients. (B) Histograms of the most distinctive modalities according to progression status. The histograms were created using information from all patients with PsP (dashed lines) and TP (solid lines). (C) Scatter plots of the voxels of patients with highest ratios of PsP (blue) and TP (red). Abbreviations: FA, fractional anisotropy; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; Gd, gadolinium; PH, peak height; PsP, pseudo-progression; PSR, percentage signal recovery; rCBV, relative cerebral blood volume; TP, true progression; TR, repetition time.
Interinstitutional Validation
We evaluated the trained model on the dataset acquired from University of Pennsylvania on an independent testing cohort from Thomas Jefferson University with different acquisition protocols. Seven out of 10 TP patients and 8 out of 10 PsP patients were diagnosed correctly by the model, for an overall accuracy of 75% (AUC, 0.80). The training performance was 79% (AUC, 0.80).

Discussion
In this study of glioblastoma patients treated with standard chemoradiation, we used advanced feature extraction and machine learning techniques to comprehensively capture the radiographic characteristics of a given ROI using structural MRI, the temporal dynamics of DSC-MRI, and DTI-derived modalities. Notably, our approach identified selected radiomic features within the given ROI in post-chemoradiation MRI that are significantly and robustly correlated with the histopathology of resected tissue, thereby offering noninvasive means of discriminating between TP and PsP in posttreatment glioblastoma. Critically, we have made these methods and models freely available through the Cancer Imaging Phenomics Toolkit (www.cbica.upenn.edu/captk), a publicly available open-source software platform (Supporting Fig. S1), to facilitate clinical use and further validation of these results in other studies. This software has been designed for research purposes only and has neither been reviewed nor approved for clinical use by the US Food and Drug Administration or any other federal/state agency and should not be used as the primary source of information for making clinical decisions.

Using advanced computational methodologies, our proposed noninvasive signature can quantify subtle imaging characteristics within an ROI that confer an estimate of the likelihood of TP versus PsP. It is important to emphasize that no single imaging feature was sufficiently discriminative by itself in our modeling. Rather, several QIP features were integrated by our multivariate approach to generate a discriminative score able to capture differences between TP and PsP. These results emphasize the importance of comprehensive multivariate analysis as opposed to imaging threshold based on isolated features, and the use of computational methods complementing traditional human interpretation. One of the important strengths of this signature is that it is generated from images acquired in the standard-of-care surveillance of glioblastoma patients. Thus, additional testing (invasive or otherwise) is not required, which is an advantage when considering clinical generalizability. Importantly, the QIP features are strongly associated with histopathologic scoring (Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.76, P = 5.5 × 10−13), and the predictive models have been validated in an independent replication cohort, unseen during their training, as well as via LOOCV.

We quantitatively evaluated the performance of our approach to distinguish between TP and PsP using models trained both independently on, and in combination with, 2 distinct feature extraction approaches: one based on deep learning and another using APS radiomic features. The comparison between the deep learning–based model and the APS radiomic features–based model yielded similar results, based on their evaluation on a relatively small independent replication cohort (Table 1). Interestingly, when combining the 2 feature types to create an integrated model, we noted a drop (>17%) in the classifier distinguishing PsP from the rest, while the accuracy of the classifier distinguishing TP from the rest remained stable. It is worth noting that the evaluation of the APS features–based model using a LOOCV scheme revealed a better performing model. A larger cohort of patients could possibly allow for further conclusions, and for developing a deep learning classifier instead of using deep learning to create features for training an SVM model. However, considering the current results, we tend to be in favor of the model trained using APS radiomic features due to the benefit of interpretability. Larger datasets might allow deep learning achieve more reproducible and accurate results in future studies.

The feature engineering approach we consider for estimating TP can offer potential insights into biological mechanisms via each MRI sequence that may uniquely reflect radiographic phenotypes of TP versus PsP. Specifically, regions of TP in our data showed increased contrast uptake on the T1-Gd sequences, which, consistent with existing literature, may be indicative of regional angiogenesis and associated with compromise of the blood–brain barrier in areas of tumor infiltration.38 T2 and T2-FLAIR sequences provide information relevant in the assessment of areas of nonenhancing and necrotic tumor, as well as the extent of the peritumoral edematous/invaded tissue.39 Our results identified regions of TP demonstrating lower signal intensity on T2 and T2-FLAIR, which indicate relatively lower water content and may thus reflect higher levels of tumor infiltration. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the TP regions harbor a higher ratio of malignant cells to water content. DTI maps the diffusion process of water in the brain, affected in part by tumor cellularity40 and by the integrity of white matter structures, as well as the underlying microstructure of tissue (eg, via the DTI-FA measurements). Here, regions of TP showed lower DTI-TR and increased DTI-FA that may be expected in areas of higher cellular concentration (ie, tumor cell proliferation). DTI-AX and DTI-RAD were also consistent with overall diffusivity captured by the DTI-TR volume. DSC imaging reflects various aspects of perfusion in the brain,29 which provide quantitative measures of regional microvasculature, perfusion hemodynamics, and permeability of blood vessels.38, 41 Specifically, when brain tumors exceed a critical volume, the resultant ischemia triggers the secretion of angiogenic factors that promote vascular proliferation, leading to the formation and maintenance of tumor vessels.42-48 These new, immature vessels tend to be tortuous and leaky.49 In our analysis, the second principal component of the DSC signal (PC2) is inversely related to the magnitude of the signal drop, in relation to the baseline. Our results indicate a relatively lower PC2 in TP regions, which may be indicative of a higher degree of blood–brain barrier compromise and leaky neovasculature. We also observed PC3, which reflects the steepness of the complete perfusion signal drop and its recovery rate. We found TP regions to show relatively higher values of PC3 that may suggest a relative time delay in the contrast agent reaching the TP tissue, possibly due to higher flow resistance, tortuosity, and other characteristics of tumor vasculature.29, 38, 43, 50 While these proposed biological associations are limited by the macroscopic nature of MRI, it must be pointed out that one does not require understanding of the mechanism to develop an effective signature—it merely requires rigorous validation to have potential clinical use.

The limitations of our study include the fact that it relied on data from a single institution and could benefit from validation in multi-institutional data. Furthermore, the discovered signature relies upon features extracted from advanced mpMRI, which may not be routinely acquired in all clinical departments. Sample size is also a potential limitation, as the strength of deep learning methods is often improved as the number of subjects increases. The limited number of patients relative to the number of features used in deep learning methods, in particular, may increase the risk of overfitting. We addressed this potential pitfall by cross-validation of all steps when using APS features (ie, feature selection, SVM and SVR parameters selections, and training and testing on different patients). Multi-institutional, prospective validation of our signature is necessary to establish interinstitutional reproducibility.

In conclusion, advanced computational analyses are increasingly used in the clinical evaluation of human gliomas and their response to treatment. The present study extracts subtle but informative QIP features from the temporal dynamics of DSC-MRI, DTI, and structural MRI modalities and integrates them via multivariate machine learning to develop an imaging signature that may noninvasively distinguish TP from PsP. Accurate stratification of the entities of TP and PsP may facilitate appropriate triage of patients to continuing maintenance, therapy, or evaluating them for new intervention, which carries great importance in the era of increasing personalization of therapy.

Funding Support
This study was supported by National Institutes of Health grants on “Predicting brain tumor progression via multiparametric image analysis and modeling” (R01-NS042645) and “Cancer imaging phenomics software suite: application to brain and breast cancer” (U24-CA189523) and a grant by the State of Pennsylvania to the University of Pennsylvania's Abramson Cancer Center.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures
Spyridon Bakas has received research grants from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the National Cancer Institute Informatics Technology for Cancer Research. Adam P. Dicker has received personal fees from Roche, Varian, EMD Serono, Janssen, Cybrexa, Oncohost, ThirdBridge, Noxopharm, and Self Care Catalysts. Donald M. O’Rourke has received personal fees from Soma Therapeutics and the Wistar Institute, holds US patent US7625558 and multiple provisional patents on CART cells, and has received a Novartis grant for CART cells. Suyash Mohan has received research grants from NovoCure, the Penn Center for Precision Medicine, and Galileo CDS. The other authors made no disclosures.

Author Contributions
Hamed Akbari: conceptualization, methodology, MATLAB programming, data interpretation, validation, analysis, data collection, writing and editing. Saima Rathore: CaPTk programming, data interpretation, validation, analysis, writing and editing. Spyridon Bakas: data interpretation, validation, data collection, writing and editing. MacLean P. Nasrallah: data interpretation, neuropathology, validation, data collection, writing and editing. Gaurav Shukla: data interpretation, radiation oncology, validation, data collection, writing and editing. Elizabeth Mamourian: data interpretation, validation, data collection, writing and editing. Martin Rozycki: data interpretation, validation, data collection, writing and editing. Stephen J. Bagley: data interpretation, validation, writing and editing. Jeffrey D. Rudie: data interpretation, validation, writing and editing. Adam E. Flanders: data interpretation, validation, data collection, writing and editing. Adam P. Dicker: data interpretation, validation, data collection, writing and editing. Arati S. Desai: data interpretation, validation, writing and editing. Donald M. O’Rourke: data interpretation, neurosurgery, validation, writing and editing. Steven Brem: data interpretation, neurosurgery, validation, writing and editing. Robert Lustig: data interpretation, radiation oncology, validation, writing and editing. Suyash Mohan: data interpretation, neuroradiology, validation, writing and editing. Ronald L. Wolf: data interpretation, neuroradiology, validation, writing and editing. Michel Bilello: data interpretation, neuroradiology, validation, writing and editing. Maria Martinez-Lage: conceptualization, methodology, data interpretation, neuropathology, validation, data collection, writing and editing, supervision. Christos Davatzikos: conceptualization, methodology, data interpretation, validation, analysis, writing and editing, supervision, funding acquisition.

