Highlights
•
MR oxygenation maps unveil tissue engagement, and hypoxia susceptibility.
•
Radiomics mines spatial kidney oxygenation patterns characteristics.
•
Oxygenation heterogeneity may predict stenting kidney outcomes.
•
Heterogeneity signals tubular health; grave harm lessens revascularization gains.
•
Radiomics-guided renal BOLD probes noninvasively into histological tissue damage.
Abstract
Background
Percutaneous-transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA) and stenting aim to halt the progression of kidney disease in patients with renal artery stenosis (RAS), but its outcome is often suboptimal. We hypothesized that a model incorporating markers of renal function and oxygenation extracted using radiomics analysis of blood oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD)-MRI images may predict renal response to PTRA in swine RAS.
Materials and Methods
Twenty domestic pigs with RAS were scanned with CT and BOLD MRI before and 4 weeks after PTRA. Stenotic (STK) and contralateral (CLK) kidney volume, blood flow (RBF), and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) were determined, and BOLD-MRI R2 * maps were generated before and after administration of furosemide, a tubular reabsorption inhibitor. Radiomics features were extracted from pre-PTRA BOLD maps and Robust features were determined by Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC). Prognostic models were developed to predict post-PTRA renal function based on the baseline functional and BOLD-radiomics features, using Lasso-regression for training, and testing with resampling.
Results
Twenty-six radiomics features passed the robustness test. STK oxygenation distribution pattern did not respond to furosemide, whereas in the CLK radiomics features sensitive to oxygenation heterogeneity declined. Radiomics-based model predictions of post-PTRA GFR (r = 0.58, p = 0.007) and RBF (r = 0.68; p = 0.001) correlated with actual measurements with sensitivity and specificity of 92% and 67%, respectively. Models were unsuccessful in predicting post-PTRA systemic measures of renal function.
Conclusions
Several radiomics features are sensitive to cortical oxygenation patterns and permit estimation of post-PTRA renal function, thereby distinguishing subjects likely to respond to PTRA and stenting.
Graphical Abstract
ga1
Download: Download high-res image (148KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Questions answered in this article
BetaPowered by GenAI
This is generative AI content and the quality may vary. 
Learn more
.

How might the ratio of the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) index R2 * to isotopic measurements of Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) predict kidney response to revascularization?

What significant changes were observed in GFR, RBF, and cortical volume in the Stenotic Kidney (STK) compared to the Contralateral Kidney (CLK)?

How were sensitivity and specificity calculated for the outcomes of renal artery stenting?

What hypothesis was tested regarding the use of radiomics-based evaluation of renal Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) images?

What comparisons were made between the Stenotic Kidney (STK) and the contralateral kidney (CLK) regarding radiomics features?
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Abbreviations
PTRApercutaneoustransluminal renal angioplastyRASrenal artery stenosisCTcomputed tomographyBOLDblood oxygenation-level dependentMRImagnetic resonanceimagingSTKstenotic kidneyCLKcontralateral kidneyRBFrenal blood flowGFRglomerular filtrationrateICCintraclasscorrelation coefficientMDCTmulti-detectorcomputed tomographyROIregion of interestIBSIimage biomarkerstandardization initiativeSDstandard deviationGLCMgray-levelco-occurrence matrixGLRLMgray-level run-lengthmatrixGLSZMgray-level size zonematrixNGTDMneighborhoodgray-tone difference matrixGLVgrey-level varianceLRLGElong-run-low-grey-level-emphasisZSVzone-size-varianceSZHGEsmall-zone-high-gray-level-emphasisMAPmean arterialpressurePRAplasma renin activitySCrserum creatinineCIconfidence interval
Keywords
Renal artery stenosisPercutaneous-transluminal renal angioplastyStentingRadiomicsBOLD MRIResponderPredictive model
1. Introduction
Renal artery stenosis (RAS) is a major underlying cause of secondary hypertension, most commonly due to atherosclerotic lesions [1]. Chronic ischemic injury can lead to the deterioration of renal function and to tissue injury, both of which increase activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, inflammation, and oxidative stress. While the obstruction in the main lumen of the renal artery is often an important instigator of injury in the post-stenotic kidney, RAS often synergizes with other risk factors to aggravate kidney injury and induce small vessel disease within the kidney [2]. Therefore, restoration of the patency of the renal artery does not necessarily lead to optimal blood pressure control or reversal of kidney tissue injury. In fact, clinical trials have shown that in some patients, loss of kidney function and persistence of renovascular hypertension may continue despite percutaneous-transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA) and stenting [3]. Furthermore, in a subgroup of patients, kidney injury may accelerate after PTRA [4]. Hence, means to predict which patients would benefit from PTRA and stenting are in dire need.
Tomographic imaging tools allow studying each kidney individually and probing the functional effects of a stenosis on the loss of renal blood flow (RBF), function, and oxygenation distal to the stenosis. We have previously shown that multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) provides reliable assessments of single-kidney volume, perfusion, RBF, and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) [5], [6]. In addition, MRI is a unique tool that permits measurements of regional renal oxygenation in vivo [7]. Previous studies have shown that blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD)-MRI may reflect the functional status of the kidney tissue exposed to chronic ischemia, and the ratio of the BOLD index R2 * to isotopic measurements of single kidney GFR may predict its response to revascularization [8]. Furthermore, the use of furosemide, which inhibits oxygen-dependent transport in the medullary thick ascending limb, may allow the assessment of functional tubular mass in the stenotic kidney [9].
In recent years it has become clear that digital tomographic images can be converted into a high-dimensional dataset that can be mined for quantitative features, reflecting pathophysiological processes that may otherwise remain undetected. Radiomics allows the extraction of quantitative features that can be mined and combined with other clinical, physiological, or demographic features and applied toward developing more comprehensive models to improve and personalize decisions for a large number of conditions [10]. Application of such models in the kidney includes attempts to distinguish renal cell carcinoma from benign masses using enhanced CT and functional MRI [11], [12], [13]. Assessment of tissue properties such as heterogeneity in texture, vascularity, diffusion, or subtle alterations in response to a challenge may carry important diagnostic and prognostic information and support risk stratification [14], [15] that are difficult to achieve with other means.
Tissue oxygenation is an important element underpinning kidney viability and possibly capacity for recovery. Therefore, this study was designed to test the hypothesis that radiomics-based evaluation of renal BOLD images may augment the ability to detect and predict kidney response to revascularization. We took advantage of a well-characterized swine model of RAS that we developed and studied the pigs before and 4 weeks after PTRA and stenting.
2. Materials and methods
All animal study procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and followed the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1996).
In twenty female domestic pigs, unilateral RAS was induced by inserting an irritant coil in the right renal artery. Six weeks later, to assess the development of RAS, (pre-PTRA) multi-detector CT (MDCT) and MRI studies were performed to calculate renal volume and function. Next, RAS animals underwent PTRA and stenting and were monitored for 4 additional weeks, wherein post-PTRA CT and MR scans were repeated. A few days after the in vivo studies, animals were euthanized with a lethal intravenous dose of sodium pentobarbital (100 mg/kg). The delay between the completion of in vivo studies and euthanasia was implemented to allow recovery and contrast agent clearance from tissues. Kidneys collected for histology were immersed in a saline solution containing heparin and later preserved in formalin, or shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80ºC [16].
2.1. Surgical procedures
RAS was induced by the implantation of a balloon-mounted irritant coil in the renal artery under fluoroscopic guidance. The coil was secured into the renal artery wall as the balloon was inflated. Subsequently, the balloon was deflated and removed. Using a PhysioTel telemetry device (Data Science International, St. Paul, Minnesota) surgically implanted in the femoral artery, arterial pressure was recorded starting on the day of the RAS procedure. PTRA and stenting were performed following procedures similar to the placement of the coil but using an inert stent and resulted in the restoration of the stenotic artery lumen.
2.2. CT and MR imaging
CT and MR imaging were performed under anesthesia, 3–4 days apart, 4 weeks after PTRA. Before each in vivo study animals were anesthetized using Telazol (5 mg/kg) and xylazine (2 mg/kg). Anesthesia was maintained with intravenous ketamine (0.2 mg/kg/min) and xylazine (0.03 mg/kg/min) (for CT) or inhaled 1–2% isoflurane (for MRI) throughout the course of imaging.
2.3. MDCT imaging
Renal hemodynamics and function were evaluated in both kidneys using MDCT (Somatom Sensation 128, Siemens Medical Solutions, Forchheim, Germany). Contrast-enhanced images were utilized to calculate, as previously described [17], cortical and medullary volumes, regional renal perfusion, RBF, and GFR of both the stenotic kidney (STK) and contralateral kidney (CLK).
Contrast injections were carried out through a pigtail catheter advanced through the left jugular vein and placed in the superior vena cava. The tomographic limits containing both kidneys were determined using a pilot scan. After a bolus injection of iopamidol (0.5 ml/kg over 2 s) 160 consecutive scans were acquired. The acquisition was synchronized to start close to the peak of the aorta intensity signal. A 3-second delay between imaging initiation and the bolus administration allowed timing of the imaging when the contrast reached the kidney and during its passage through the cortical vasculature (maximal intensity) and enhance the contrast between the cortex and medulla, which was used for the delineation of the region of interest (ROI). The initial scans were collected at a higher rate (1 scan/0.6–2.5 s) to capture the fast intravascular phase, whereas the last 70 images were acquired at a lower rate (6–8 s intervals) to sample the intratubular phase. Total scanning times were about 3 min. To avoid motion artefacts, respiration was suspended during the initial fast scans, but animals were ventilated in-between scans during the second phase (last 70 scans). To assess renal volumes, using helical acquisition axial images with a thickness of 0.6 mm and resolution of 512 × 512 were collected, and subsequently reconstructed at 5 mm thickness.
2.4. BOLD MR imaging
MRI scans were performed on a 3 T (GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wisconsin) scanner. BOLD-MR images were collected before (baseline) and 15 min after injection through an ear vein catheter of furosemide (20 mg). Using a Fast Gradient Echo sequence, bilateral kidney BOLD images were acquired during suspended respiration with 16 different echo times. Axial BOLD images in oblique planes were prescribed off the pilot images, mainly to cover the entire volume of the renal hilum. Imaging parameters were set to TR/TE= 100 ms, 2.1–27 ms, Flip Angle= 40°, FOV= 32 cm, Slice thickness= 7 mm, Matrix size= 256 × 256.
2.5. Image analysis
Analyses were performed in Analyze™ (Biomedical Imaging Resource, Mayo Clinic, Minnesota) and MATLAB® (MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts) in both the STK and CLK.
2.6. Assessment of renal function and hemodynamics by MDCT
The degree of stenosis was calculated from the 3D-CT reconstruction of the renal artery at 0.6 mm thickness. Cortical and medullary volumes were determined after slice-by-slice delineation of the two compartments on 5 mm thick cross-sectional tomographic images and multiplying the surfaces by the slice thickness. Perfusion was estimated by fitting the signal attenuation values vs. time curve to an extended Γ-variate model. Cortical and medullary blood flows were calculated by multiplying the perfusion by the corresponding volumes. RBF was estimated by summing the blood flow of the two compartments. Finally, GFR was determined from the cortical curve and the slope of the proximal tubular curves, as described previously [18].
3. Calculation of BOLD maps
Cortical ROIs were defined manually (Fig. 1). The voxel-by-voxel R2 * values, as the surrogate for oxygenation level, were calculated by fitting a linear model to the log values of the decaying MR signal vs. echo times. For each animal, four sets of R2 * maps were generated, corresponding to cortical oxygenation levels before and after furosemide injection at the STK and CLK.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (285KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Illustration of renal structures in the STK (A) and CLK (B), highlighting the differences in size/volume and morphology. Additionally, renal cortex delineation is shown on BOLD MR images with TE= 2.1 ms (C) and TE= 15.3 ms (D). In these images, longer echo times enhance the differentiation and exclusion of the medulla (white arrow) from the cortex, and more clearly identify regions affected by susceptibility artifacts (red arrow). STK: stenotic kidney, CLK: contralateral kidney, BOLD: blood oxygenation-level dependent.

3.1. Radiomics analysis
Features selection and data preparation for radiomics analysis followed the guidelines proposed by the image biomarker standardization initiative (IBSI) [19] and the workflow described by van Timmeren et al. [20]. BOLD maps were interpolated and re-sampled isotropically with in-plane resolution of 1.0 mm. For each animal, the histogram of the cortical BOLD values was generated, and the mean and standard deviation (SD) determined. The upper limit for acceptable cortical R2 * was selected to be 24 1/s, corresponding to Mean+ 2 SD, given that regions with higher values were mainly associated with bowel susceptibility artifacts [21]. R2 * values in renal cortex have been shown to follow a normal distribution [21]. The optimum width of bins was selected using Scott’s normal reference rule [22]:
h = 3·49σ / 3√n
Where σ is the SD of the BOLD distribution and n is the number of voxels. The optimum width was calculated as ∼3 1/s. Therefore, a fixed number of bins (n = 8) were used for discretization.
In radiomics, each zone is defined with inter-connected voxels sharing the same gray level. Runs are defined as the length in the number of consecutive voxels in a specific direction that share the same gray level value [23]. Radiomics features were extracted from bBOLD maps using an open-source Matlab code, previously used and validated [24], [25]. Forty-three features including 3 global first-order histograms, 9 gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), 13 gray-level run-length matrix (GLRLM), 13 gray-level size zone matrix (GLSZM), and 5 neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix (NGTDM) features were extracted.
Robust features were selected using a perturbation-based method [26]. In this approach, bBOLD maps from a random subset of pigs (n = 10) underwent different perturbations including translation (sub-pixel size shifts), rotation (various angles; 0, 60, 120, 180°), contour randomizations, and added noise to yield 16 perturbed maps per subject. For each individual feature intra-class correlation (ICC) was calculated. We followed Koo and Li guideline [27], according to which ICC values < 0.50 are considered poor, 0.50–0.74 moderate, 0.75–0.90 good, and > 0.90 excellent. Only features with excellent ICC values were used for the subsequent analysis.
3.2. Patterns of renal oxygenation
To investigate the potential effect of RAS on patterns of renal oxygenation and response to furosemide, the radiomics features were compared between the STK and CLK, and in each kidney between the baseline (pre-furosemide) and post-furosemide injections.
3.3. Predictive model
We assessed the feasibility of developing a predictive model for stratification of subjects who may benefit from stenting. Robust features and physiological parameters were incorporated as predictors. Models aimed to predict the post-PTRA levels of key determinants of STK function, including single-kidney GFR, RBF, mean arterial pressure (MAP), as well as systemic plasma renin activity (PRA) and Serum creatinine (SCr). Three different sets of models were examined. In the first set, only physiological predictors (Table 1) plus pre-PTRA MAP were included as the predictors. In the second set, BOLD data in the format of mean cortical R2 * was added to investigate whether adding oxygenation without its spatial distribution information improves the predictions. Finally, in the third set, oxygenation patterns, in the format of radiomics features, were additionally incorporated in the models and the predictions were re-examined.
Table 1. Physiological parameters.

a. Comparison of Single-Kidney Parameters and Cortical Metrics for STK and CLK Pre- and Post-PTRA
Empty Cell	STK	CLK
Single-Kidney Parameters	Pre-PTRA	Post-PTRA	Pre-PTRA	Post-PTRA
GFR (ml/min) RBF (ml/min) Stenosis Cortical Volume (cc) Blood Flow (ml/min) BOLD R2 * (1/s)	69.5 (59.0,77.3) 502.7 (397.7567.9) 73% (65%,83%) 116.8 (89.8130.8) 462.4 (373.4519.6) 16.5 (15.1,17.5)	82.3 (68.4101.7)* 669.9 (475.0800.9)* - 135.3 (102.8155.5)* 622.4 (420.4709.9)* 16.3 (14.3,17.1)*	82.2 (67.8102.0)† 569.7 (482.7751.4)† - 129.5 (116.9142,4)† 542.8 (456.7713.2)† 18.2 (17.1,18.6)†	98.3 (80.7120.3)*† 762.8 (667.0837.9)*† - 155.9 (137.0179.6)*† 686.5 (628.6787.9)*† 17.3 (16.3,18.7)*†
b. Comparison of Systemic Parameter Values Before and After PTRA Treatment
Parameters	Pre-PTRA	Post-PTRA
MAP (mmHg) PRA (ng/ml/hr) SCr.(mg/dl)	105 (101,116) 104.5 (84.1123.9) 1.4 (1.3,1.6)	111 (102,119) 131.6 (120.7157.8)* 1.7 (1.6,2.0)*
GFR glomerular filtration rate, PTRA percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty, STK stenotic kidney, CLK contralateral kidney, BOLD blood oxygenation-level dependent, MAP mean arterial pressure, SCr serum creatinine.
* P < 0.05 vs pre-PTRA.
† P < 0.05 vs. Pre-PTRA.
The core of our methodology involved an iterative partitioning approach, where the dataset was repeatedly divided into training and testing cohorts. Specifically, in each iteration, 80% of the dataset (16 pigs) was randomly selected for training and the remaining 20% (4 pigs) for testing. This partitioning was not static; instead, it was dynamically repeated to generate approximately 4800 unique training and test sets. Coefficients were calculated using Lasso regression. Using the developed models, the mean and SD of the absolute values of the markers of interest were determined. Additionally, in an alternative approach, the models were trained against the change (Δ = Post-PTRA–Pre-PTRA) in those physiological markers due to intervention.
The sensitivity and specificity of the outcomes were calculated in terms of distinguishing subjects that would benefit from the renal artery stenting. Previous studies have estimated the 95% confidence interval (CI) for single-kidney CT-based GFR measurements to be > 20% of the mean absolute value. This suggests that to report an improvement in post-PTRA GFR, with 95% confidence, it should be at least 20% higher than the pre-PTRA mean GFR [6], [28]. Any response smaller than this threshold was considered a negative outcome (non-responder). A similar CI criterion was applied to assess sensitivity and specificity for RBF.
3.4. Statistical analysis
Results for those with gaussian distribution are reported as Mean±SD, and for others as Median (25%,75%). Wilcoxon signed-rank and rank-sum tests were used, respectively, for paired (same kidneys, pre/post) and two-population (STK/CLK) comparisons of the features extracted from different maps. For individual hypotheses and correlations p < 0.05 was considered significant, whereas for multiple hypotheses p-values were adjusted according to Holm–Bonferroni correction. The intervals of agreement ( ± 2 SD) between the predicted and actual post-PTRA values were determined using Bland-Altman analysis.
4. Results
4.1. RAS Development
The degree of stenosis was significant and hypertension developed 6 weeks after RAS induction (Table 1). In the STK, GFR, RBF, and cortical volume were significantly lower than in the CLK, suggesting STK dysfunction. Four weeks after stenting, these all significantly increased in both kidneys (Table 1). Despite the improvement of the mean STK-GFR of the cohort, in a subset of 6 animals, it further declined. Furthermore, some other markers of renal injury like SCr and PRA remained slightly elevated.
4.2. Robustness assessment
Maps underwent sixteen perturbations, and the reproducibility of features was examined by calculating ICC metrics. Twenty-six features passed the requirement for excellent robustness (ICC≥0.9), and the 17 remaining features were discarded from the development of predictive models. No feature was sensitive to translational and rotational perturbations. The largest declines in ICC score and the number of features that met the criteria were observed when noise (n = 10) and contour randomness (n = 7) were introduced.
4.3. Oxygenation in the STK and CLK
Radiomics features extracted from baseline bBOLD maps were compared against those obtained after furosemide. In the STK, none of the differences in radiomics features reached or tended to reach significance level, indicating that the patterns of distribution of cortical oxygenation did not change meaningfully in response to inhibition of tubular transport. In contrast, in the CLK, long-run-low-gray-level-emphasis (LRLGE) was higher after furosemide vs. baseline (p = 0.0022), indicating developing patterns with an increase in the extent of runs (possibly representing the vascular or tubular system) with higher oxygenation after furosemide. Moreover, the gray-level-variance (GLV) feature (from GLRLM) was higher (p = 0.0017) at baseline than after furosemide. Decline in GLV happened under either diminution of extreme variations in oxygenation, or reduction of the length of runs associated with extreme (mostly low) oxygenation. This implied that in the CLK the surplus oxygen secondary to inhibition of oxygen-dependent tubular reabsorption tended to raise the oxygenation levels of tubules or vessels with low basal values to approach the mean cortical oxygenation, and thereby reduced variations.
At baseline, GLSZM-derived GLV (p = 0.0007) and zone-size-variance (ZSV) (p = 0.0002) showed greater inhomogeneity in terms of zone sizes and levels of oxygenation in the CLK compared to the STK. Hence CLK oxygenation distribution created a large number of zones, diverse in size and oxygenation level. In contrast, in the STK the oxygenation level range was more uniform, distributed in fewer zones with overall larger volumes. These observations were consistent with the feature Busyness which was higher (p = 0.002) in the CLK. None of the radiomics features of uniformity correlated significantly with cortical volumes, suggesting that they do not derive predominantly from to cortical thinning.
4.4. Predictive models
Within the physiological markers (Table 1), STK post-PTRA GFR best correlated with the pre-PTRA GFR (r = 0.60; p = 0.005), yet ultimately the strongest correlation was derived from the radiomics feature, Busyness (r = 0.68; p = 0.001), a marker sensitive to variations of oxygenation from one voxel to its neighbors (Fig. 2) [29]. Interestingly, Busyness did not correlate with the pre-PTRA GFR, suggesting that a higher oxygen distribution heterogeneity may not necessarily indicate better basal functionality but rather may be a marker of greater GFR recovery capacity. The post-PTRA RBF showed an inverse correlation with small-zone-high-gray-level-emphasis (SZHGE) (r = −0.66, p = 0.002), a feature sensitive to the presence of small hypoxic regions. Of the pre-PTRA STK physiological markers, post-PTRA RBF was closely correlated with the GFR (r = 0.69, p = 0.001). Finally, post-PTRA PRA strongly correlated with diastolic blood pressure (r = 0.65; p = 0.002) and cortical volume (r = 0.63; p = 0.003) but not with any radiomics feature.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (116KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (A & B) BOLD and (C & D) binned-BOLD (bBOLD) maps. Images on the left (A & C) represent the kidney with higher Busyness feature compared to those on the right (B & D). Increased variations in oxygenation correspond to more favorable stenting outcomes. BOLD: blood oxygen-level dependent.

When only pre-PTRA physiological data were used as predictors to develop post-PTRA predictive models, except for MAP (r = 0.77; p = 0.0001), none of the correlations between the predicted and true post-PTRA measurements, such as STK-GFR (r = 0.40; p = 0.08), STK-RBF (r = 0.25; p = 0.28), PRA (r = 0.30; p = 0.19), or SCr (r = 0.26; p = 0.26), reached significance level. This suggested that the physiological parameters alone were insufficient for reliable post-PTRA prediction of renal recovery. Including the mean R2 * values also did not improve the predictions either: GFR (r = 0.30; p = 0.19), RBF (r = 0.30; p = 0.28), SCr (r = 0.20; p = 0.40), PRA (r = 0.43, p = 0.06), and MAP (r = 0.76, p = 0.0001). However, incorporating the radiomics information, the predicted absolute post-PTRA GFR (r = 0.58, p = 0.007) and RBF (r = 0.68; p = 0.001) in the STK showed statistically significant correlation with the true values (Fig. 3. A-B).
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (239KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Correlation between estimations based on absolute-models versus actual measurements for (A) GFR and (B) RBF, and the alternative variation-based approach (Δ-change models) for (C) GFR and (D) RBF. GFR: glomerular filtration rate, RBF: renal blood flow.

When applying an alternative approach for the model-training (changes in the markers from pre-PTRA rather than absolute post-PTRA values), similar features maintained the strongest correlations. For instance, changes in STK-GFR remained strongly correlated with busyness (r = 0.66, p = 0.001). The statistical correlations between the predictions and measured values were also comparable between the two approaches. Predicted post-PTRA STK GFR (r = 0.69, p = 0.0007) and RBF (r = 0.57, p = 0.008) showed a statistically significant correlation with the measured true values (Fig. 3. C-D). Additionally, Bland-Altman analysis was performed to compare the two predictive approaches, and the agreement intervals were comparable for GFR (Fig. 4. A-B) and RBF (Fig. 4. C-D) for the absolute-value and the alternative (delta) approaches.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (195KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Bland-Altman graphs for the absolute-models of (A) RBF and (C) GFR, and the alternative variation-based approach (Δ-models) of (B) RBF and (D) GFR. Both approaches exhibit comparable levels of uncertainty for the two markers. RBF: renal blood flow, GFR: glomerular filtration rate.

Fig. 5. A-B presents a comparative analysis of the measured and predicted values for RBF and GFR to facilitate an assessment of the performance of the prediction model vs the actual measurements. For the Absolute and the Delta predictive models, the mean GFR values were 87.2 ± 17.9 and 87.4 ± 20.7 ml/min, and the mean RBF values were 647.0 ± 168.8, 645.8 ± 202.9 ml/min, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of the two approaches to predict who may benefit from PTRA are shown in Tables 2a, 2b. The two approaches yield comparable sensitivity, whereas the Absolute method showed superior specificity over that of the Delta.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (133KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Post-PTRA GFR vs RBF for estimated (o) and measured (◊) values using the absolute-value (A) and the alternative variation-based (Δ-models) approach (B). Estimated vs measured MAP. Predicted values from the model based solely on physiological markers (without radiomics features) display a strong and statistically significant correlation with measurements (C). PTRA: percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty; GFR: glomerular filtration rate, RBF: renal blood flow, MAP: mean arterial pressure.

Table 2a. Comparison of Sensitivity and Specificity for GFR and RBF Using Absolute and the Alternative Approach (Δ-change models).

Empty Cell	Absolute	Δ-models
Sensitivity	Specificity	Sensitivity	Specificity
GFR RBF	80% 77%	60% 71%	70% 77%	40% 57%
GFR glomerular filtration rate, RBF renal blood flow.
Table 2b. Diagnostic Accuracy of Predicted GFR and RBF in Distinguishing Responders from Non-responders using the Absolute Approach.

Empty Cell	Measurements GFR
Responder	Non-responder
Predicted GFR	Responder	8	4
Non-responder	2	6
Empty Cell	Measurements RBF
Responder	Non-responder
Predicted RBF	Responder	10	2
Non-responder	3	5
GFR glomerular filtration rate, RBF renal blood flow.
The correlation for SCr and PRA were not significant, and for predicted vs. true MAP correlation did not improve by including radiomics predictors (r = 0.75, p = 0.0001), implying that renal oxygenation is not a major determinant of MAP variations (Fig. 5. C).
5. Discussion
In this study we developed models for GFR and RBF in RAS which closely predicted these parameters after stenting. This was achieved by the incorporation of the spatial patterns of renal oxygenation into the models. We found that including oxygenation information in the format of radiomics features improved the predictive models over similar models developed solely based on physiological predictors with no spatial information. This finding emphasizes the notion that BOLD data carries valuable intrinsic information beyond mean R2 * values used in conventional analysis.
We developed and investigated models to predict the ability of renal artery stenting to restore renal function and hemodynamics. This might allow identifying patients who may benefit from this procedure, as previous studies have demonstrated that the outcome of PTRA might be unsatisfactory or even detrimental in some populations [30]. Therefore, distinguishing responder from non-responder populations prior to treatment is of paramount importance. In our study, we expanded on previous attempts to stratify such patients [31], [32] by introducing a novel paradigm that capitalizes on the spatial patterns of oxygenation. Our radiomics-driven analysis has offered significant insights into the potential interactions among various physiological markers, made possible by the relevant features of our methodology. Additionally, it is important to emphasize that another significant benefit of our approach is the elimination of the need for isotopic GFR assessment.
We found that STK hemodynamics and function were significantly lower than in the CLK, underscoring the development of significant stenosis. Interestingly, hemodynamics and function rose in both the STK and CLK after PTRA, consistent with the response to PTRA and the maturation of our juvenile pigs, respectively. Nevertheless, several STKs failed to respond to PTRA or deteriorated further, and congruently PRA and SCr rose further. This heterogeneity of the recovery rates allowed the identification of predictors of response.
We found that estimations of post-PTRA GFR and RBF closely correlated with the actual measurements, with baseline STK-GFR being a key predictor of outcomes. The links between the pre-PTRA GFR with post-PTRA GFR and RBF might be partly indirect. Declines in GFR likely correspond to the severity of renal injury secondary to inflammation, fibrogenesis, and vascular dysfunction, which adversely affect RBF as well. However, post-intervention RBF restoration is not necessarily paralleled by GFR improvement [33], and therefore does not suffice as a sole marker for stratification. Yet, a potential increase in GFR may not be sustainable without a coinciding RBF recovery. Consequently, viable renal recovery likely requires concurrent restoration of both renal hemodynamics and function. This underpins the choice of the two-marker (GFR and RBF) criteria for stratification of the responders.
Local deoxyhemoglobin concentrations reflect local oxygen availability, which beyond basal oxygen consumption in the kidney is often determined by energy-dependent tubular transport. In the medullary loops of Henle, this activity is inhibitable by a loop-diuretic like furosemide. We have previously shown that furosemide administration reduces R2 * in the functioning human kidney, consistent with inhibition of tubular sodium-chloride transport in the medulla and to a lesser extent in the cortex [9]. Similarly, we have shown that furosemide decreases R2 * in pigs in the renal cortex, possibly by the decrease in medullary oxygen consumption that returns more oxygenated blood to the cortex [34]. Overall, an avid response to furosemide indicates active basal sodium reabsorption that falls after the inhibition of electrolyte transport. In contrast, in severely injured kidneys, furosemide elicits a modest change, indicating that their basal transport activity was suppressed. Consistent with our observation in human subjects with RAS[9], we observed a blunted response to furosemide in the STK of our animals compared to the CLK.
In addition, levels of renal R2 * show substantial variability among individuals as well as within kidneys with widely heterogeneous microvascular status [35]. We found that oxygenation heterogeneity declines in diseased kidneys with larger variations in the CLK than in the STK. Moreover, within the CLK, during furosemide challenge the markers of variation declined as well. Fig. 6 shows a schematic model of R2 distribution * in the STK and CLK before and after furosemide. In the STK lower variability was a consequence of tighter range of R2 * values. Contrarily, in the CLK the overall oxygenation increased in response to furosemide and brought previously hypoxic regions closer to midrange-R2 * values, whereas some regions that with midrange-R2 * at baseline shifted towards the highly oxygenated population, as revealed by the LRLGE feature.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (126KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Schematic illustration of oxygenation distribution in the CLK and STK. In CLK, mid-range R2 * values are predominantly found in a larger number of smaller zones, while in STK, these values appear in fewer, larger zones. Furosemide administration does not significantly alter oxygenation in STKs but leads to an overall enhancement in CLK oxygenation.

Another important observation in this study was that desirable outcomes directly correlated with higher oxygenation heterogeneity, represented by the Busyness feature. Within the STK, this may be explained by blood supply and tubular activity that both decrease distal to an obstruction in the main renal artery. A greater severity of insult compels a smaller fraction of active tubules, and therefore smaller disturbance in the homogeneity of oxygenation. Thus, STKs with severe tubular injury show greater uniformity of oxygen distribution, similar to that observed in the CLK after administration of furosemide. In kidneys with only mild tubular injury oxygenation is less uniform as it reflects the heterogeneity of distribution of remaining segments of viable tubules, which may also function at different rates. Similarly, Pruijm et al. have shown in patients with chronic kidney disease lower heterogeneity of intra-renal distribution of oxygenation, which also predicted an adverse renal outcome, emphasizing renal oxygenation as an independent predictor of renal function decline [36]. Yet, while none of the radiomics features of uniformity correlated with cortical volumes, we cannot rule out a secondary link between uniformity and cortical thinning mediated by the loss of viable nephrons.
Notably, R2 * , commonly used as a marker of blood oxygenation, may not always accurately represent blood oxygenation levels due to physiological variations among subjects [37]. A recent study by Prasad et al. demonstrated a close correlation between renal function and blood pO2 and hemoglobin saturation (StO2) derived from R2 * and fractional blood volumes, while R2 * alone was insufficient. [38]. In our study, since all pigs were of the same genetic lineage and subjected to uniform housing and feeding protocols, such physiological variations were minimal. However, translating these findings to clinical settings might require additional steps for enhanced accuracy. Specifically, converting R2 * maps to StO2 or blood pO2 prior to radiomics analysis could significantly improve the sensitivity and accuracy of the analysis in a clinical context. This consideration underscores the need for cautious interpretation of R2 * values, especially when applying findings from animal models to human patients.
Limitations
Our study had some limitations. We did not investigate the renal medulla, mainly because its small and fragmentary structure in the pig kidney introduces large uncertainty to segmentation and radiomics analysis. Moreover, the functional makers of interest in this study, GFR and RBF, for the most part, are determined and regulated by the cortical microenvironment. However, potential models that circumvent this limitation and account for dysfunction and injury in the medulla would likely improve the sensitivity and specificity of patient stratification. Yet, our two cortex-based approaches showed robust sensitivity to identify subjects who benefited from stenting. Lower specificity is likely associated with an uneven fraction in our dataset of subjects that showed function deterioration compared to those who improved. On the analytical side, undoubtedly, a larger sample size would enhance the statistical aspects and robustness of the models but is often unavailable in preclinical and translational studies, warranting establishing a foundation of emerging analytical methods on smaller datasets. While massive datasets may sometimes be required for radiomics-based studies, much information and insights can be gleaned from smaller datasets by employing robust statistical learning methods as we showed that radiomics analysis can be utilized effectively in conjugation with carefully chosen feature selection and an appropriate regression method.
In conclusion, this study shows that radiomics analysis is a powerful method to extract information from renal BOLD-MRI maps. Incorporating this information allowed developing predictive models to identify subjects who may benefit from renal artery stenting. Further studies are needed to determine the applicability of these methods to human subjects with RAS in order to support clinical decision-making regarding the utility of interventions. Development and testing of alternative models or physiological parameters may also prove to be useful.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal study procedures were approved by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and followed the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1996).
Funding
This work was partly supported by the National Institutes of Health [DK120292, DK122734, HL158691, and AG062104].
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mina H. Alsaeedi: Data curation, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Gandhi Deep: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Ebrahimi Behzad: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – original draft, Funding acquisition, Resources, Writing – review & editing. Lilach O. Lerman: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:Lilach Lerman reports financial support was provided by the National Institutes of Health. Lilach Lerman reports a relationship with CureSpec and Ribocure-Pharmaceuticals that includes: consulting or advisory. The other authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
Not Applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
