Abstract
Rationale and Objectives
We constructed a comprehensive model by combining the radiomics and clinical features of tumors to predict the recurrence risk of patients with operable stage IA–IIIA non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our aim was to improve the accuracy of prognostic prediction and provide personalized treatment plans to enhance patient outcomes.
Materials and Methods
We retrospectively analyzed 152 surgically treated patients with pathologically confirmed stage IA–IIIA NSCLC. These patients were randomly divided into a training cohort and a test cohort in an 8:2 ratio. Using the 3D Slicer image computing platform, we manually delineated the regions of interest (ROI) for all lesions and extracted radiomics features using Python. We used the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) to select the radiomics features, while the COX multivariate regression model was employed to identify independent clinical risk factors for recurrence. Finally, we utilized logistic regression (LR) to build the model and validated it using the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC). The predictive performance of the model was evaluated using the concordance index (C-index), and the clinical value of the model was compared through decision curve analysis (DCA).
Results
We extracted a total of 1562 radiomics features. After feature selection, we retained 29 features. The COX multivariate regression model demonstrated that the N stage was an independent risk factor for postoperative recurrence. In the training and test cohorts, the area under the curve (AUC) values of the radiomics-clinical comprehensive model were 0.972 and 0.937, respectively, while the C-index values were 0.815 and 0.847. These values surpassed those of the standalone clinical model or radiomics model.
Conclusion
Our study demonstrates that a comprehensive model based on CT radiomics and clinical features can effectively stratify the risk of postoperative recurrence in patients with operable NSCLC. It provides a powerful tool for accurately stratifying the risk of high-risk patients after surgery.
Key Words
Radiomics
Non-small cell lung cancer
Prognosis
Recurrence
Machine learning
INTRODUCTION
According to the Cancer Statistics 2023 report, lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths and ranks second in the incidence of new cancer cases among both men and women (1). Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most prevalent pathological type of lung cancer, comprising 85% of all lung cancer cases (2). For patients with resectable NSCLC, surgical resection is recommended as the preferred treatment method. Additionally, the application of adjuvant therapy has significantly improved patient prognosis (3). However, accurate staging is crucial for guiding the surgery and adjuvant therapy of NSCLC patients, as well as evaluating patient prognosis. Currently, the TNM staging system, widely recognized as the most valuable tumor staging method worldwide, is extensively utilized for assessing the prognosis of malignant tumors. However, patients with the same TNM stage exhibit significant differences in prognosis, indicating limitations in the assessment of lung cancer prognosis using the TNM staging system. Therefore, there is a need to develop new biomarkers that complement the TNM staging system, allowing for more personalized treatment plans to improve patient prognosis.
In recent years, radiomics methods, which extract quantitative information reflecting microscopic tissue changes from Computed tomography (CT) images and construct models, have shown certain value in the diagnosis, staging, treatment evaluation, prognosis prediction, and risk stratification of cancer patients (4–7). Radiomics analysis encompasses five main steps: image segmentation, feature extraction, feature selection, model building, and evaluation. It enables the extraction of microscopic information from CT images, which would otherwise go unnoticed, and its application in clinical practice. This emerging, non-invasive "biopsy" method has shown promising results when combining radiomics with PET/CT and clinical factors for guiding the risk stratification of NSCLC patients. For instance, Wang et al. (8) found that radiomics features with multi-regional characteristics help stratify the survival risk of patients with clinical staging and pathological stage IA pure solid NSCLC. Another study (9) utilizing 18 F-FDG PET/CT images discovered that the combined radiomics-clinical model may serve as a practical method for non-invasive detection of tumor immune status in NSCLC. Chen et al. (10) used tumor-intrinsic and peri-tumoral radiomics features to develop a radiomics model capable of predicting the preoperative status of lymphovascular invasion (LVI) and overall survival (OS) in patients, thus contributing to the formulation of personalized treatment strategies before surgery. Despite significant progress in radiomics research, there is still a need for improvement in data processing standards and predictive accuracy.
Considering the aforementioned, this study aims to develop a combined prediction model that incorporates preoperative CT radiomics features with clinically relevant features associated with prognosis. The objective is to predict the risk of postoperative recurrence in resectable NSCLC patients and provide personalized treatment decision support.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients
This study retrospectively analyzed clinical, pathological, and imaging data from 246 patients with pathologic stage IA–IIIA NSCLC who underwent thoracoscopic radical surgery at the Department of Thoracic Surgery in the Hospital from January 2016 to October 2020. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) NSCLC confirmed by pathological diagnosis and treated with thoracoscopic radical surgery; (2) complete clinical, pathological, and imaging data; (3) complete follow-up information. The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) incomplete clinical, pathological, imaging, or follow-up information; (2) any anticancer treatment prior to surgery; (3) image artifacts. A total of 152 patients were included in the study and randomly divided into a training cohort (n = 121) and a test cohort (n = 31). Baseline data included age, gender, smoking history, family history of lung cancer, history of respiratory comorbidities (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, tuberculosis), tumor stage, surgical type, and postoperative adjuvant treatment type. The endpoint of the study was disease-free survival (DFS), defined as the time from the date of surgery to the date of failure (event). The follow-up was completed in March 2023. Patients were followed up every 3 months within 2 years after surgery, every 6 months from 2 years to 5 years, and annually after 5 years.
Equipment and Scanning Methods
Chest CT scanning was performed using a Multi-detector row spiral CT (Revolution CT, GE). The patient was instructed to lie supine with arms raised, head first, and to take a deep breath and hold it during scanning. The scanning parameters were as follows: pitch 0.938:1, rotation speed 0.6 s/r, tube voltage 100 kV, automatic tube current modulation (200–350 mA), slice thickness 5 mm, interval 5 mm, detector rows 256, matrix 512 × 512, reconstruction interval 0.625 mm, and reconstruction slice thickness 0.625 mm.
Radiomics Analysis
Image Segmentation
Image segmentation was performed by two junior thoracic surgeons. First, the chest CT images with a thickness of 0.625 mm were imported into the 3D Slicer software (version: 5.1.0–2022–05–27) to outline the region of interest (ROI) representing NSCLC. The main three-dimensional (3D) ROI was manually outlined slice by slice. Segmentation started from the lung window cohorting (width: 1400 HU; level: −400 HU) to separate the tumor from adjacent structures, and the selected ROI was adjusted precisely to the tumor edge. Each ROI was drawn around the entire tumor volume, avoiding the inclusion of bone, fat, and air. The delineation results were reviewed and modified by a senior thoracic surgeon.
Image Preprocessing and Analysis
To reduce the influence of inter-image variations on the results, image preprocessing was performed before extracting radiomics features, including image standardization and resampling (resampling ratio: 1 mm × 1 mm×1 mm). This ensured a consistent scale and spatial resolution of the images for different patients to enhance the comparability of features.
Feature Extraction, Selection, and Model Construction
Feature Extraction, Selection, and Radiomics Model Construction
Feature extraction was performed using internal feature analysis module of Pyradiomics. The extracted features included 306 first-order statistical features (FIRSTORDER), 14 shape features (SHAPE), and 1211 texture features. Texture features were divided into five classes, including gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), gray-level run-length matrix (GLRLM), gray-level size zone matrix (GLSZM), gray-level dependence matrix (GLDM), and neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix (NGTDM). A total of 1562 radiomic features were extracted from the ROI.
First, t-tests were performed on normally distributed features, and Mann–Whitney U tests were performed on non-normally distributed features. Features with a p-value < 0.05 were retained. Then, for highly repetitive features, the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient was used to calculate the correlation between features, and one of the features with a correlation coefficient greater than 0.9 between any two features was retained. To retain the ability to depict features to the greatest extent, we used a greedy recursive deletion strategy for feature filtering, meaning the feature with the greatest redundancy in the current set was deleted each time. Finally, the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression model with five-fold cross-validation was used to reduce the dimensionality of the extracted features in training cohort and retain the features with non-zero coefficients for model construction.
For constructing the radiomics model, eight different models were compared: logistic regression (LR), support vector machine (SVM), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), extreme random trees (Extra Trees), Random Forest, boosting methods (XGBoost, LightGBM), and multilayer perceptron (MLP). The selection of the best performing model, along with its final input features and optimized hype-parameters, was determined using multiple five-fold cross-validation applied to the training cohort.
Clinical Model, Radiomics-Clinical Combined Model Construction
Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to analyze the effects of clinical features on the risk of recurrence. Features that were significant in the univariate analysis (P < 0.05) were included in the multivariate analysis, and those that were statistically different in the multivariate analysis (P < 0.05) were ultimately retained. Clinical models were constructed using LR. The model generated a clinical signature (CS).
Combining RS and CS, a radiomics-clinical combined prediction model was constructed to predict the risk of postoperative recurrence in patients with stage IA-IIIA NSCLC. The study developed a radiomics-clinical combined nomogram. The workflow of this study is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1
Figure viewer
Figure 1 The workflow of this study. This research is mainly divided into two parts, including constructing and validating the model. (a) Radiomics model: first, outlines ROI on CT images of patients; then, extracts and selection features; finally, constructing and validating radiomics model. (b) Clinical model: COX univariate and multivariate analysis was used in clinical model to determine independent risk factors for postoperative recurrence (N stage); then, constructing and validating clinical model. (c) Radiomics-clinical model: construct a comprehensive prediction model based on radiomics features and clinical features through COX proportional hazards regression models, and validate the model. (d) The comprehensive prediction model was used to predict the prognosis of patients, and the patients were divided into low-risk cohort and how-risk cohort as shown in the KM curve. The results of DCA and calibration curve show that the comprehensive prediction model has better prediction efficiency. (e) In order to facilitate clinical application, we constructed the nomogram. CT, computed tomography; DCA, decision curve analysis; KM, Kaplan–Meier; ROI, regions of interest.
Statistical Analysis
To compare the intercohort differences in clinical baseline data between the training cohort and the test cohort, normally distributed metric data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation, including age; non-normally distributed data were represented by median (interquartile range) using the Mann–Whitney U test. Categorical variables were analyzed using chi-square tests, including gender, smoking history, family history of lung cancer, respiratory comorbidities, tumor stage, surgical type, and postoperative adjuvant treatment type. Missing values were filled in before the data were split into training and testing sets. To handle missing data, median imputation was used for discrete data, while mean imputation was used for continuous data. Cox univariate and multivariate proportional hazards regression models were used to determine the clinical independent risk factors for recurrence. The models were validated using receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) and area under the curve (AUC). The DeLong test was used to compare the statistical differences in AUC values among the three models.
Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to calculate hazard ratios (HR), and Kaplan–Meier (KM) survival curves were plotted. The log-rank test was used to assess the differences in survival curves between cohorts. Three nomograms (clinical nomogram, radiomics nomogram, radiomics-clinical combined nomogram) were constructed using Cox proportional hazards regression models. The accuracy and clinical efficacy of the three nomograms were evaluated and compared using the concordance index (C-index), decision curve analysis (DCA), the Hosmer–Lemeshow test (HL-test), and calibration curves. All statistical results were considered significant at p < 0.05.
RESULTS
Statistical Results of Clinical Baseline Data
Baseline data of patients in the training cohort and test cohort are shown in Table 1. Overall, among the 152 patients, there were 103 males and 49 females. The majority of histological types were lung adenocarcinoma, accounting for 73.68% of the total population. The distribution of tumor stages was 53.95% for stage I, 23.68% for stage II, and 22.37% for stage III. The majority of patients underwent thoracoscopic lobectomy. Among them, there were 87 smokers and 65 patients who had never smoked. A total of 116 patients had no respiratory comorbidities, accounting for 76.32% of the total population. 62 patients received adjuvant chemotherapy, and a small number of patients received postoperative targeted therapy. Only 21 patients had a family history of lung cancer. Overall, the baseline data of the two cohorts of patients were balanced, but there were statistically significant differences in age and smoking history between the two cohorts.
Characteristic	Training Cohort (n = 121, %)	Test Cohort (n = 31, %)	P value
Age	62.98 ± 9.70	63.68 ± 8.26	0.002
Gender	 	 	0.085
Female	43(35.54)	6(19.35)	 
Male	78(64.46)	25(80.65)	 
Histopathology	 	 	0.309
Adenocarcinoma	92(76.03)	20(64.52)	 
Squamous cell	28(23.14)	10(32.26)	 
Other NSCLC	1(0.83)	1(3.23)	 
Stage	 	 	0.193
IA	9(7.44)	2(6.45)	 
IB	60(49.59)	11(35.48)	 
IIA	8(6.61)	2(6.45)	 
IIB	21(17.36)	5(16.13)	 
IIIA	23(19.01)	11(35.48)	 
Operation	 	 	0.937
Lobectomy	110(90.91)	27(87.10)	 
Segmentectomy	3(2.48)	1(3.23)	 
Sublober resection	6(4.96)	2(6.45)	 
Pneumonectomy	2(1.65)	1(3.23)	 
Smoke	 	 	0.006
No	56(46.28)	9(29.03)	 
Yes	65(53.72)	22(70.97)	 
Respiratory comorbidity	 	 	0.269
No	92(76.03)	24(77.42)	 
Yes	29(23.97)	7(22.58)	 
Adjuvant Therapy	 	 	0.489
No	61(50.41)	14(45.16)	 
Taxane Platin	57(47.11)	15(48.39)	 
Targeted Drug	3(2.48)	2(6.45)	 
Heredity	 	 	0.869
No	103(85.12)	28(90.32)	 
Yes	18(14.88)	3(9.68)	 
T Stage	 	 	0.810
T1	16(13.22)	6(19.35)	 
T2	85(70.25)	20(64.52)	 
T3	13(10.74)	3(9.68)	 
T4	7(5.79)	2(6.45)	 
N Stage	 	 	0.728
N0	91(75.21)	16(51.61)	 
N1	18(14.88)	6(19.35)	 
N2	12(9.92)	9(29.03)	 
Table 1
Baseline Characteristics of Patients in the Training and Test Cohorts
Open table in a new tab
Follow-up and Recurrence
The median follow-up time of the study sample was 75.5 months (range: 55 months to 96 months). Among them, 71 patients experienced recurrence (46.71%, 71/152). The recurrence rates for stage I, II, and III patients were 34.15%, 50%, and 73.53%, respectively, showing a gradual increase. 34 patients experienced distant metastasis (47.89%). The most common sites of metastasis were the bone (12 cases, 35.29%), brain (6 cases, 17.65%), and lung (6 cases, 17.65%). Other sites of metastasis included the liver and gastrointestinal tract. Overall, the median DFS was 34.82 months.
Results of Clinical Feature Selection
Cox univariate analysis of the 11 clinical features showed that gender, respiratory comorbidity, smoking history, tumor stage, and lymph node stage had significant statistical differences (p < 0.05, Fig 2a). These five features were included in the Cox multivariate analysis, and the results showed that N stage was significantly associated with an increased risk of recurrence (p < 0.05, Fig 2b). To compare the impact of incorporating different clinical data on the predictive results, we separately included different clinical features in the clinical model and compared their predictive performance. The results showed that the clinical model constructed based on N staging had the best predictive performance (Supplementary Appendix Fig. S1), so we ultimately chose N staging to be involved in the construction of the clinical model.
Figure 2
Figure viewer
Figure 2 Univariate (a) and multivariate (b) cox regression analysis forest plots of clinical features.
Results of Radiomics Feature Selection
A total of 1562 radiomics features were extracted, and then an analysis of the average parameters was conducted on tumors after image segmentation, including Sphericity, SurfaceArea, VoxelVolume, LowGrayEmphasis (Supplementary Appendix Table S1). These features were standardized for univariate analysis. The results showed that 905 radiomics features had significant inter-cohort differences in the training cohort (P < 0.05). Finally, 29 discriminative radiomics features were selected after dimensionality reduction using the LASSO regression algorithm with five-fold cross-validation (Fig 3). These features included 16 wavelet features, including 11 texture features such as GLCM, GLRLM, GLSZM, GLDM, and NGTDM, and five first-order features, including HHH maximum, HHH skewness, HLH root mean square, HLL median, and LHL skewness. After conducting feature selection, we calculated the weight for each feature (Supplementary Appendix Table S2).
Figure 3
Figure viewer
Figure 3 (a) The optimal penalty coefficient Lambda (λ) in LASSO regression model was screened by means of five-fold cross-validation and MSE; (b) Penalty diagram of feature coefficients. As the penalty coefficient λ gradually increases, more and more feature coefficients are compressed to 0, and the dashed lines correspond to 29 image omics features screened in this study. (c) The 29 radiomics features was selected by LASSO model. The corresponding weight values of each feature. LASSO, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator; MSE, mean square error.
Construction and Validation of Clinical Models, Radiomics Models, and Radiomics-Clinical Comprehensive Models
In the training cohort, multiple algorithms were used to construct the radiomics model by inputting the 29 radiomics features selected by the LASSO regression model. These algorithms included LR, support vector machines (SVM), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), Extra Trees, Random Forests, boosting methods (XGBoost, LightGBM), and multilayer perceptron (MLP). The results showed that when constructing the radiomics model, the ROC curve of the test set indicated that LR had the highest AUC value (Supplementary Appendix Fig. S2). Although the AUC value of SVM equals 1, the possibility of overfitting should be considered. LR exhibited superior accuracy compared to other models and, based on the final C-index, it also performed the best in stratifying the risk of patient recurrence. Therefore, LR was chosen as the final method to construct the radiomics model. The clinical model was constructed based on N stage features using LR. Finally, the RS and CS were combined to build the radiomics-clinical comprehensive prediction model.
The ROC curves and AUC values for the training and test cohorts are presented in Table 2 and Figure 4. In the training cohort, the AUC was 0.616 (0.539–0.693) for the clinical model, 0.971 (0.948–0.993) for the radiomics model, and 0.972 (0.951–0.994) for the radiomics-clinical comprehensive model. In the test cohort, the AUC was 0.788 (0.630–0.945) for the clinical model, 0.916 (0.775–1.000) for the radiomics model, and 0.937 (0.821–1.000) for the radiomics-clinical comprehensive model.
Figure 4
Figure viewer
Figure 4 ROC curves of the radiomics model, clinical model, and radiomics-clinical model in the training cohort (a) and test cohort (b). AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; CI, confidence interval; CM, clinical model; RM, radiomics model; RCM, radiomics-clinical model; ROC, receiver operating characteristic.
Model	Training Cohort (n = 121)	Test Cohort (n = 31)
AUC (95% CI)	Sensitivity	Specificity	AUC (95% CI)	Sensitivity	Specificity
CM	0.616(0.539–0.693)	0.368	0.902	0.788(0.630–0.945)	0.786	0.867
RM	0.971(0.948–0.993)	0.947	0.859	0.916(0.775–1.000)	0.929	0.941
RCM	0.972(0.951–0.994)	0.912	0.891	0.937(0.821–1.000)	0.929	0.941
Table 2
Predictive Performance of Three Models in the Training Cohort and Test Cohort
AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; CI, confidence interval; CM, clinical model; RM, radiomics model; RCM, radiomics-clinical model.
Open table in a new tab
Survival Analysis
The COX proportional hazards regression model was used to calculate the HR, with a cutoff value of 1, dividing patients into high-risk (HR>1) and low-risk (HR<1) cohorts. KM survival curve analysis demonstrated significant statistical differences between the high-risk and low-risk cohorts in the overall cohort, training cohort, and test cohort (Log-rank P < 0.001), as shown in Figure 5. The comprehensive prediction model could effectively distinguish patients at high risk of recurrence from those at low risk.
Figure 5
Figure viewer
Figure 5 (a) Total cohort, (b) Training cohort, (c) Test cohort KM of recurrence risk in high-risk and low-risk cohorts. KM, Kaplan–Meier.
Construction of Nomograms
A radiomics-clinical nomogram was constructed based on the RS and CS, as shown in Figure 6. In the training cohort, the C-index of the clinical nomogram was 0.611, the radiomics nomogram was 0.801, and the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram was 0.815. In the test cohort, the C-index of the clinical nomogram was 0.696, the radiomics nomogram was 0.820, and the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram was 0.847. Comparing the C-index results between the two cohorts, the radiomics-clinical comprehensive nomogram showed significantly better predictive performance compared to the clinical nomogram and radiomics nomogram. The Delong test results indicated a significant statistical difference between the clinical nomogram and the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram in both the training and test cohorts (Delong test P < 0.05). However, there was no statistically significant difference between the radiomics nomogram and the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram in both the training cohort and test cohorts.
Figure 6
Figure viewer
Figure 6 The radiomics-clinical nomogram to predicting progression-free survival in patients with NSCLC. NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; RS, radiomics signature.
The nomogram constructed by the COX proportional hazards regression model showed an HR of 23.38 for N stage and 11.56 for the RS.
The DCA for the training and test cohorts is shown in Figure 7. Both the clinical nomogram and the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram had higher net benefits compared to the extreme curve, and the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram had higher net benefits than the clinical nomogram. Calibration curves for the training and test cohorts were plotted as shown in Figure 8. In the training cohort, the HL test showed a p-value of 1.000 for the clinical nomogram, a p-value of 0.949 for the radiomics nomogram, and a p-value of 0.467 for the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram. In the test cohort, the HL test showed a p-value of 0.621 for the clinical nomogram, a p-value of 0.206 for the radiomics nomogram, and a p-value of 0.125 for the radiomics-clinical combined nomogram. All p-values were greater than 0.05, indicating that there was no statistical difference between the predicted values and the actual values. This suggests high consistency between the predicted values and the actual values, indicating the good performance of the prediction model and its guiding significance in clinical treatment.
Figure 7
Figure viewer
Figure 7 Comparison of DCA between clinical model and radiomics-clinical model in the training cohort (a) and test cohort (b). DCA, Decision curve analysis.
Figure 8
Figure viewer
Figure 8 Comparison of calibration curve between clinical model and radiomics-clinical model in the training cohort (a) and test cohort (b).
DISCUSSION
With advancements in imaging techniques, early-stage NSCLC patients now have the opportunity for early diagnosis and treatment. However, recurrence continues to be a major factor affecting the survival and quality of life of NSCLC patients. Although TNM staging is widely used to predict the survival of NSCLC patients, it still has limitations (11). Therefore, it is significant to identify new predictive factors to improve the accuracy of prognosis and assist thoracic surgeons in selecting more beneficial treatment strategies to enhance the prognosis of NSCLC patients.
Several studies have found that radiomics features computed from CT images have potential clinical value in predicting the prognosis of NSCLC patients. For example, Jaryd et al. (12) successfully classified patients into low-risk and high-risk cohorts for recurrence/progression using a multimodal model that included CT and FDG PET-CT staging, as well as tumor, peritumoral, and bone marrow features. Another study (13) demonstrated that radiomics features from both the tumor core and peritumoral regions can predict two-year recurrence-free survival in NSCLC patients.
The aim of this study was to construct a comprehensive prediction model by combining radiomics features extracted from preoperative CT images with clinically relevant features associated with prognosis, in order to predict the postoperative recurrence risk in operable stage IA–IIIA NSCLC patients. Our study successfully classified patients into high-risk and low-risk cohorts for recurrence. The combined model demonstrated better predictive accuracy than the clinical model in both the training and test cohorts. The calculated HR for recurrence risk was 11.56, indicating that the combined model played an independent predictive role and improved the accuracy of the prediction. Furthermore, the significant stratification ability of the combined model suggests its guiding significance for perioperative adjuvant therapy in patients.
In this study, CT images underwent preprocessing techniques such as resampling (14) and standardization to reduce the influence of different scanning devices, scanning parameters, and image reconstruction algorithms. Various methods including univariate analysis, the Spearman correlation coefficient, and the LASSO regression model were employed to select radiomics features that were predictive of recurrence. It was found that texture features played an important role in predicting recurrence among the selected features. Texture features have a significant impact on measuring tumor heterogeneity (15), which is an important indicator for evaluating patient prognosis, further confirming the importance of texture features in relation to patient prognosis.
In addition to radiomics features, this study included 11 clinical features, In the follow-up stage, we discovered that some patients chose to receive postoperative adjuvant treatment at local hospitals due to transportation difficulties, resulting in missing data. The postoperative adjuvant treatment data, which is ordinal in nature, can be imputed using either the median or mode methods. Given the close association between postoperative adjuvant treatment and tumor stage, we grouped the data for imputation purposes. We compared the imputation results obtained from both the median and mode methods, and found them to be consistent (Table S5).
We recognize the critical importance of postoperative adjuvant treatment in determining patient prognosis. To enhance the credibility of our research findings, we addressed the issue of missing values by excluding patients who were missing postoperative adjuvant treatment and conducted analyses on the remaining samples. and N stage was identified as an independent risk factor for predicting postoperative recurrence through COX univariate and multivariate analysis. (Fig S6). Therefore, it suggests that the missing values of postoperative adjuvant treatment did not influence the selection of clinical features in our study. Based on these features, we constructed clinical, radiomics, and radiomics-clinical combined models and evaluated their predictive performance in the test cohort. The results showed that the combined model outperformed the clinical model in terms of predictive performance, with higher AUC values and C-index, demonstrating the advantage of combining radiomics features with clinical features in patient prognosis assessment. In addition, to provide a comparative analysis with the latest research methods, we developed a deep learning model (please refer to the supplementary appendix for comprehensive details). The findings revealed comparable levels of accuracy between the two models, thereby further substantiating the viability of the research methodology.
This study also focused on (16) incorporating histopathology-based whole-slide imaging (WSI) data into the prediction model, as histopathology has been proven to serve as an independent prognostic factor for predicting therapeutic efficacy and prognosis of tumor patients (17–19). The pathologyomics workflow in this study involved using QuPath for processing WSI, delineating regions of interest (ROI), performing pathology image preprocessing, and extracting features to construct the pathologyomics model. Currently, our research has progressed to the data annotation stage, and some of the research content can be found in the Supplementary Appendix Fig. S3. By integrating histopathology, radiomics, and clinical features, we hope to develop a more comprehensive prediction model to guide individualized treatment after surgery for NSCLC patients. This innovative research direction provides new ideas and possibilities for the prognosis assessment of NSCLC patients.
Although this study has made some progress, there are still limitations. First, the sample size of this study is relatively small and derived from a single center, thus requiring further studies with larger sample sizes and multicenter research to validate the stability and generalizability of the results. Second, this study is retrospective and subject to retrospective limitations, necessitating more prospective randomized trials to verify the reliability of the results. Additionally, there is room for improvement in our model construction process, such as further optimizing feature selection and model adjustment methods to enhance the stability and accuracy of the prediction model.
In conclusion, the comprehensive prediction model constructed based on CT images and clinical features demonstrates good performance in predicting postoperative recurrence risk in resectable NSCLC patients. The model combining radiomics features with clinical features exhibits higher predictive accuracy compared to traditional clinical models, providing thoracic surgeons with a more accurate prognostic assessment tool and aiding in the formulation of individualized treatment plans. Furthermore, by integrating histopathology data, we hope to further improve the accuracy and clinical utility of the prediction model. However, future studies involving larger-scale, multicenter, and prospective research are needed to validate and optimize the predictive performance of the model.
CONCLUSION
This study of patients with stage IA–IIIA operable NSCLC demonstrates that a model constructed by combining CT radiomics and clinical features accurately predicts the risk of postoperative recurrence, providing a new reference method for the development of personalized treatment plans.
