Abstract
Objectives
To evaluate the value of CT-based whole lung radiomics nomogram for identifying the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Materials and methods
A total of 974 patients with COPD were divided into a training cohort (n = 402), an internal validation cohort (n = 172), and an external validation cohort (n = 400) from three hospitals. Clinical data and CT findings were analyzed. Radiomics features of whole lung were extracted from the non-contrast chest CT images. A radiomics signature was constructed with algorithms. Combined with the radiomics score and independent clinical factors, multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to establish a radiomics nomogram. ROC curve was used to analyze the prediction performance of the model.

Results
Age, weight, and GOLD were the independent clinical factors. A total of 1218 features were extracted and reduced to 15 features to build the radiomics signature. In the training cohort, the combined model (area under the curve [AUC], 0.731) showed better discrimination capability (p < 0.001) than the clinical factors model (AUC, 0.605). In the internal validation cohort, the combined model (AUC, 0.727) performed better (p = 0.032) than the clinical factors model (AUC, 0.629). In the external validation cohort, the combined model (AUC, 0.725) performed better (p < 0.001) than the clinical factors model (AUC, 0.690). Decision curve analysis demonstrated the radiomics nomogram outperformed the clinical factors model.

Conclusion
The CT-based whole lung radiomics nomogram has the potential to identify the risk of CVD in patients with COPD.

Clinical relevance statement
This study helps to identify cardiovascular disease risk in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on chest CT scans.

Key Points
• To investigate the value of CT-based whole lung radiomics features in identifying the risk of cardiovascular disease in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients.

• The radiomics nomogram showed better performance than the clinical factors model to identify the risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

• The radiomics nomogram demonstrated excellent performance in the training, internal validation, and external validation cohort (AUC, 0.731; AUC, 0.727; AUC, 0.725).

Similar content being viewed by others

CT whole lung radiomic nomogram: a potential biomarker for lung function evaluation and identification of COPD
Article Open access
20 February 2024

CT-Based radiomics nomogram of lung and mediastinal features to identify cardiovascular disease in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a multicenter study
Article Open access
15 March 2025

Radiomics approach for survival prediction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Article 13 April 2021
Introduction
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a widely prevalent respiratory disease characterized by largely irreversible airflow limitation measured with spirometry [1, 2]. COPD is a major cause of increasing morbidity and mortality across the world with a significant health care burden [3]. COPD usually occurs with other chronic diseases, including cardiovascular disease (CVD), diabetes, lung cancer, osteoporosis, and depression [4]. Among these comorbidities, CVD is considered the most significant and is the leading cause of death, accounting for 40% deaths in the Chinese population [5]. According to literatures, COPD patients are more prone to developing CVD compared to those without COPD [6]. COPD and CVD share common risk factors like smoking and obesity; moreover, the risk increases with increasing age [7, 8]. However, the link between COPD and CVD is not fully understood [7]. Moreover, CVD in COPD patients is associated with a higher risk for hospitalization, longer hospital stay, and all-cause CVD-related mortality [8, 9]. Therefore, it is critical to identify the risk of CVD in COPD patients for optimal diagnosis and management.

CT is used as a screening modality for detecting CVD [10]. Previous research has shown that a radiological risk score depends on CT performed adequately in predicting the 5-year incidence of cardiovascular risk [11]. Existing tools for predicting CVD’s risk in COPD patients include the following: (1) clinical phenotypes; (2) blood biomarkers; (3) radiological biomarkers; and (4) genetic risk factors, or a combination of these [12]. Regarding the CT evaluation of CVD, only the cardiovascular structures were evaluated [13]. The cardiac and pulmonary functions are physiologically integrated. The imaging features of cardiopulmonary dysfunction have been rarely reported [14]. Radiomics, an emerging high-throughput approach of extracting quantitative image features [15, 16], has been used successfully for lung nodule identification and classification based on chest CT images [17]. However, few studies have focused on whole lung radiomics identifying CVD in COPD patients [18]. To the best of our knowledge, there is unmet clinical need to investigate the quantitative data derived from the pulmonary parenchyma in identifying the risk of CVD in COPD patients and exploring the interaction of cardiopulmonary function. Based on this hypothesis, our aim was to evaluate the value of CT-based whole lung radiomics features in identifying the risk of CVD in COPD patients.

Materials and methods
Patients and clinical data
This retrospective study was approved by the ethics committees of three hospitals (2022SL068), and the requirement for written informed consent was waived. The study included 1653 patients with confirmed COPD by pulmonary function tests (PFT) at three centers between September 2015 and April 2023. Inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) COPD confirmed by PFT; (2) PFT and chest CT within 2 weeks; (3) complete thin-slice (1 mm) chest CT images. Exclusion criteria were the following: (1) comorbid other thoracic diseases (e.g., pneumonia, pulmonary atelectasis, lung nodule, or mass and pleural effusion); (2) complicated with any malignant tumors; (3) spine implant or marked image artifact. A total of 974 patients were included with these criteria. In order to make the study more rigorous and prevent the model from overfitting, 574 patients from two hospitals were randomly assigned to a training cohort (n = 402) or internal validation cohort (n = 172) with a ratio of 7:3, and 400 patients from one hospital were assigned to an external validation cohort (n = 400) [16, 19]. The training cohort was used to develop the model, while the internal and external validation cohorts were used to assess the model’s effectiveness in clinical practice and enhance the study’s robustness.

Clinical information was recorded including age, weight, height, BMI, gender, GOLD grade, smoking status, and laboratory examination indicators such as C-reactive protein (CPR), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), procalcitonin (PCT), albumin, alkaline phosphatase, triglyceride, platelet distribution width (PDW), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), interleukin-12 (IL-12), arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2), white blood cell count, neutrophilic granulocyte percentage, percentage of lymphocytes, absolute eosinophil count, hematocrit, red blood cell distribution width, mean platelet volume, and globulin. Due to the retrospective nature, the laboratory examination factors and smoking status with missing values greater than 30% were excluded [20]. Finally, eight laboratory factors, namely white blood cell count, neutrophilic granulocyte percentage, percentage of lymphocytes, absolute eosinophil count, hematocrit, red blood cell distribution width, mean platelet volume, and globulin, were included for further analysis. CVD events were obtained by searching medical records. The presence or absence of CVD events was diagnosed at the time of admission, and the interval between the admission and the acquisition of the chest CT scan was less than 1 month. CVD events were defined, using the International Classification of Disease (ICD) (https://icd.who.int/browse10/2019/en#/) 10 definitions, as all diagnosis of hypertension, coronary artery disease (angina, (sub)acute myocardial infarction, acute or chronic ischemic heart diseases), and heart failure.

CT image acquisition and pulmonary function test
The participants underwent non-contrast CT with a Siemens Force, SOMATOM Definition AS, LightSpeed VCT (GE Medical Systems), Philips Brilliance 64 (Philips Healthcare), Philips Brilliance 256 (Philips Healthcare), or United Imaging uCT760 (United Imaging Healthcare) scanner. Axial CT images of the entire thorax were acquired at full inspiration. The scanning parameters are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 CT acquisition protocols for different scanners
Full size table
PFT was performed using CHEST Multifunction Spirometer HI-801 (Japan). Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), percent predicted of forced expiratory flow in 1 s (FEV1%), and FEV1/FVC were measured. The diagnostic criterion for COPD is FEV1/FVC < 0.7, and FEV1 increases less than 200 mL after the use of a bronchodilator [21]. Subjects were grouped according to the global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease [22]: GOLD I grade, FEV1/FVC < 0.7, FEV1 ≥ 80%; GOLD II grade, FEV1/FVC < 0.7, 80% < FEV1 ≤ 50%; grade GOLD III, FEV1/FVC < 0.7, 50% < FEV1 ≤ 30%; GOLD IV grade, FEV1/FVC < 0.7, FEV1 < 30%.

Whole lung segmentation
First, a publicly accessed deep learning model, U-net (R231) (https://github.com/JoHof/lungmask), automatically segments the right lung and left lung. The model has been trained on large and diverse data sets covering a wide range of visual variability. The extracted left and right lung were merged into a combined region of interest (ROI). Then, the segmentation results were independently evaluated by a thoracic radiologist with 8-year experience using ITK-SNAP software [23] (version 3.8.0, www.itksnap.org) to correct the faulty segmentation.

Whole lung radiomic feature extraction
Before feature extraction, the image underwent a three-step preprocessing operation, voxel resampling, gray discretization, and image intensity normalization, resampling the image to 1 mm * 1 mm * 1 mm, and adjusting the gray value of the image to 25 Gy levels, which is helpful to reduce the influence of different layer thicknesses and reduce the interference of noise. Then, radiomics features were extracted using the open-source software PyRadiomics (3.0.1 version, https://pyradiomics.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), with three features obtained: first-order features, shape, and texture feature. Radiation features were extracted using Z-score normalization.

Radiomics feature selection and model construction
The best radiomics features were selected through the following two steps. First, the maximal redundancy minimal relevance (mRMR) algorithm was performed on the data of the training group to eliminate redundant and irrelevant parameters. The penalty parameter was adjusted by ten cross-validations, and parameters with feature coefficients which were not zero were used as the features of the final constructed radiomics prediction model. Finally, LASSO logistic regression coefficient was used to calculate the RAD score by weighting the sum of the products of the selected features and their respective corresponding coefficients, and logistic regression models based on the RAD score were constructed.

Statistically significant different variables were obtained using univariate logistic regression analysis and then entered into multivariate analysis to establish an imaging model and a combined model. A nomogram was generated for visualization of the combined model, graphical evaluation of variable importance, and calculation of identification accuracy.

Statistical analysis
In this study, R software (version 4.1.0 https://www.R-project.org) and SPSS software (version 26.0 IBM) were used for statistical analysis and graphic production. Fisher’s exact test or the chi-square test was used for classified variables, and the Mann–Whitney U test was used for continuous variables to compare baseline characteristics of patients. ROC curve was used to analyze and evaluate the prediction performance of the model. The AUCs of different models were compared by the Delong test. p < 0.05 was considered indicative of a statistically significant difference.

Results
The flowchart of patient selection is shown in Fig. 1. Out of the total of 974 patients, the three hospitals included 455, 400, and 119 patients, respectively. There were 619 COPD patients without CVD and 355 COPD patients with CVD. The number of cases containing hypertension, coronary artery disease, acute myocardial infraction, and congestive cardiac failure in the three hospitals was 74, 21, 7, and 14; 83, 52, 2, and 24; and 4, 43, 7, and 19, respectively. The mean age of the entire cohort was 68.85 years; 25.87% were female.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Flow sheet of patient selection

Full size image
Development of the clinical factors model
The clinical factors of the patients in the training set and test set are shown in Table 2. Independent risk factor identification (univariable and multivariable logistic regression analysis) is shown in Table 3. Age (p = 0.033), weight (p = 0.017), BMI (p = 0.032) and GOLD (p = 0.077) were proven as independent factors by using the univariable logistic regression analysis. Older patients (OR 1.024, 95%CI 1.002–1.047), larger weight (OR 1.023, 95%CI 1.004–1.043), higher BMI (OR 1.07, 95%CI 1.006–1.137) and higher GOLD grade(OR: 1.284, 95%CI: 0.973-1.693) may have high risk of CVD. Multiple logistic regression analysis confirmed that age (p = 0.021) and weight (p = 0.011) were independent factors. Older patients (OR 1.03, 95%CI 1.00–1.05) and larger weight (OR 1.03, 95%CI 1.01–1.05) may be associated with high risk of CVD. The height and eight laboratory examination indicators were not independent predictors (p > 0.05). Finally, the age, weight, and GOLD were incorporated into the construction of the clinical factors model.

Table 2 Baseline characteristics of the study population
Full size table
Table 3 Univariable and multivariable logistic regression analysis
Full size table
Feature extraction, selection, and radiomics signature construction
Of the 1218 radiomics features, 157 features remained after extraction from CT images, and normalization and deletion of features with correlation greater than 0.9. The features were selected by two feature selection methods: mRMR and LASSO. At first, mRMR was performed to eliminate the redundant and irrelevant features; 30 features were retained. Then, LASSO was conducted to choose the optimized subset of features to construct the final model (Fig. 2a and b). Finally, the radiomics signature was constructed by using 15 features (Fig. 2c). The RAD score was calculated using the following formula:

Fig. 2
figure 2
Optimal hyperparameter λ values were selected using ten-fold cross-validation in the LASSO regression models, with the lowest being the feature that best matched the true results (a). LASSO regression models identified the radiomics features with nonzero coefficients (b). Fifteen radiomics features and corresponding coefficients retained after dimensionality reduction by LASSO regression analysis (c)

Full size image
The RAD score for each patient in the training and test sets is shown in Fig. 2c. Independent risk factor identification (univariable and multivariable logistic regression analysis) is shown in Table 3. RAD scores (p < 0.001) were proven as independent factors by using not only the univariable but also the multiple logistic regression analysis. A higher RAD score may have high risk of CVD with the OR of 3.06 (95%CI 2.23–4.20) and 2.92 (95%CI 2.09–4.08) with the univariable and the multiple logistic regression analysis, respectively.

Development of a radiomics nomogram and evaluation of the performance of different models
The age, weight, GOLD, and RAD score were incorporated into the construction of the radiomics nomogram. The Hosmer–Lemeshow test showed a good calibration (p = 0.293, 0.062, and 0.080 in the training cohort, internal validation cohort, and the external validation cohort, respectively) of the nomogram. The calibration curves and nomograph are shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3
figure 3
The calibration curve predicts the CVD of COPD patients (a: training cohort; b: internal validation cohort; c: external validation cohort). The developed radiomics nomogram to predict CVD of COPD patients (d)

Full size image
The diagnostic performance of the combined model, the radiomics model, and the clinical factors model is shown in Table 4. In the training cohort, AUC of the combined model and the radiomics model was significantly higher than that of the clinical factors model (p < 0.001); and no significant difference in AUC was found between the combined model and the radiomics model (p = 0.523). In the internal validation cohort, the AUC of the combined model was significantly higher than that of the clinical factors model (p = 0.032); and there was no significant difference in AUC between the radiomics model and the clinical factors model (p = 0.087) and between the combined model and the radiomics model (p = 0.198). In the external validation cohort, AUC of the combined model and the radiomics model was significantly higher than that of the clinical factors model (p < 0.001); and no significant difference in AUC was found between the combined model and the radiomics model (p = 0.248). The ROC curves of the three models are presented in Fig. 4.

Table 4 Comparison of diagnostic performance of the radiomics model, clinical model, and combined model in training cohort, internal, and external validation cohorts
Full size table
Fig. 4
figure 4
The ROC curves of the radiomics model, clinical model, and combined model for predicting CVD of COPD patients in the training cohort (a), internal validation cohort (b), and external validation cohort (c)

Full size image
The decision curve analysis for the nomogram (DCA) is shown in Fig. 5. The DCA showed that the radiomics nomogram had a higher overall net benefit in identifying cardiovascular disease risk in COPD patients than the clinical factors model covered most of the range of reasonable threshold probabilities. Two examples of applying dynamic nomogram are shown in Fig. 6. For COPD patients with CVD, dynamic nomogram showed good recognition ability.

Fig. 5
figure 5
The decision curve analysis for the nomogram

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure 6
a–c A 77-year-old male patient with a weight of 73 kg diagnosed with COPD (FEV1/FVC = 0.34). The dynamic nomogram shows the total points were 95.5, and the corresponding prediction probability of CVD was 0.176. d–f A 74-year-old male patient with a weight of 76 kg diagnosed with COPD and coronary atherosclerotic heart disease (FEV1/FVC = 0.69). The dynamic nomogram shows the total points were 125, and the corresponding prediction probability of CVD was 0.846. COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC, forced vital capacity

Full size image
Discussion
Functionally, the heart and lungs are one unit, and a great number of lung diseases eventually lead to heart disease [14]. COPD can lead to cor pulmonale. However, the heart and lung disease is mostly assessed separately. This innovative study proposes to construct a CT-based whole lung radiomics nomogram to identify CVD in COPD patients. This study found the laboratory examination indicators included were not independent predictors and a single CT examination and basic clinical information are integral in identifying CVD in COPD patients.

Evaluating COPD patients for coexisting CVD is critical given its mortality rates. Moreover, with the decline of PFT, the risk of CVD is increased. It has been reported that preserved ratio impaired spirometry (PRISm) was significantly associated with increased risk for comorbid CVD and mortality [24, 25]. In an average 3-year follow-up study, Whittaker et al [26] found that the frequent and severe acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) was highly associated with CVD outcomes and mortality. Moreover, Kunisaki et al [27, 28] reported that the first 30 days post-AECOPD period are particularly susceptible to CVD. These studies highlight the importance of the early identification of COPD patients with comorbid CVD, especially for AECOPD. Our study, being cross-sectional, offers a valuable approach for the early screening and diagnosis of COPD patients with CVD using chest CT imaging.

Regarding the CVD identification, there are some studies focusing on clinical data, imaging quantitative parameters, and radiomics. Yaker et al [29] developed a model to assess the predictive role of the monocytes to HDL cholesterol ratio (MHR) in CVD development among COPD patients, with an AUC of 0.73. In a recent study, Qiu et al [18] constructed nomograms based on National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data, which included gender, age, neutrophil, RDW, lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) as independent predictors of the risk of coexisting CVD in COPD patients, with an AUC of 0.747. Li et al [30] demonstrated a direct correlation between higher blood vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and the increased risk of CVD in COPD patients. The combined model in this study with the AUC of 0.73 is similar to most of the above-mentioned studies. In our study, age, gender, BMI, and eight laboratory parameters were included. However, with the univariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis, all the laboratory parameters with p values ≥ 0.05 were not included in the construction of the clinical factors model and the combined model. In contrast, MHR, LDH, and HbA1c were not included in our study due to the retrospective nature of the study.

It has been reported that a strong association has been found between ectopic fat accumulation and impaired cardiometabolic health in patients with COPD [20]. This finding highlights ectopic fat as a potential link between COPD and CVD. Besides, some studies have focused on the cardiovascular structure itself. Radiomics is used to convert medical images into high-dimensional data and extract many quantitative features to determine focal information [15]. The constructed robust and reliable model can be used for prognosis, non-invasive disease tracking, and evaluation of disease response to treatment [31]. It has been reported that radiomics model could predict the growth of pulmonary ground-glass nodules, identify COPD in patients with lung cancer, and so on [32, 33]. In COPD patients with comorbid CVD, radiomics models have been shown to play a crucial role in identification of CVD. For example, Pujadas et al [34] built an atrial fibrillation (AF) prediction model (accuracy 0.71, AUC 0.76) and a heart failure (HF) model (accuracy 0.79, AUC 0.84) using the vascular risk factors (VRF), cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR), and radiomics model. Kockelkoren et al [11] evaluated the performance of a 5-year CVD risk prediction using radiological scores based on imaging findings, age, gender, and CT indication, achieving an AUC of 0.71. Yand et al [35] built radiomics models based on epicardial adipose tissue around the left atrium (LA-EAT) of cardiac CT images to differentiate AF subtype and to explore the prognostic value of AF recurrence after ablation, with AUCs of 0.853 and 0.793. Furthermore, these studies confirmed the reliability of radiomic features derived from cardiovascular structures in predicting CVD outcomes. To date, no studies have been conducted to identify the risk of CVD in COPD patients through whole lung radiomics. Our study has demonstrated the feasibility of this approach, although its performance is slightly inferior to the reported models constructed with the features derived from the cardiovascular structure themselves.

There are some limitations to this study. Firstly, smoking status, a common risk factor for both CVD and COPD, was excluded due to the retrospective nature of this study. Secondly, the classification and stratification of CVD, which may improve the model’s effectiveness, were not conducted due to the imbalance in each classification. Future studies should have a larger sample size and balance the classifications. Thirdly, only lung features were studied to identify CVD risk in COPD patients, and the effectiveness of cardiovascular features was not assessed. Future studies should include models based on cardiovascular features and compare them to lung-based models. Fourthly, future prospective studies should incorporate additional clinical factors, especially those highly related to CVD, to further evaluate the efficacy of radiomics nomogram.

In summary, we developed a CT-based whole lung radiomics nomogram to identify the risk of CVD in COPD patients, demonstrating the feasibility of the lung features to evaluate the CVD risk, suggesting that there is a great potential to explore the cardiopulmonary integration and widening the potential application of lung features in clinical practice.

Data sharing
Data generated or analyzed during the study are available from the corresponding author by request.

