Abstract
Objectives
To develop and assess a radiomics-based prediction model for distinguishing T2/T3 staging of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LHSCC)

Methods
A total of 118 patients with pathologically proven LHSCC were enrolled in this retrospective study. We performed feature processing based on 851 radiomic features derived from contrast-enhanced CT images and established multiple radiomic models by combining three feature selection methods and seven machine learning classifiers. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity were used to assess the performance of the models. The radiomic signature obtained from the optimal model and statistically significant morphological image characteristics were incorporated into the predictive nomogram. The performance of the nomogram was assessed by calibration curve and decision curve analysis.

Results
Using analysis of variance (ANOVA) feature selection and logistic regression (LR) classifier produced the best model. The AUCs of the training, validation, and test sets were 0.919, 0.857, and 0.817, respectively. A nomogram based on the model integrating the radiomic signature and a morphological imaging characteristic (suspicious thyroid cartilage invasion) exhibited C-indexes of 0.899 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.843–0.955), fitting well in calibration curves (p > 0.05). Decision curve analysis further confirmed the clinical usefulness of the nomogram.

Conclusions
The nomogram based on the radiomics model derived from contrast-enhanced CT images had good diagnostic performance for distinguishing T2/T3 staging of LHSCC.

Clinical relevance statement
Accurate T2/T3 staging assessment of LHSCC aids in determining whether laryngectomy or laryngeal preservation therapy should be performed. The nomogram based on the radiomics model derived from contrast-enhanced CT images has the potential to predict the T2/T3 staging of LHSCC, which can provide a non-invasive and robust approach for guiding the optimization of clinical decision-making.

Key Points
• Combining analysis of variance with logistic regression yielded the optimal radiomic model.

• A nomogram based on the CT-radiomic signature has good performance for differentiating T2 from T3 staging of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

• It provides a non-invasive and robust approach for guiding the optimization of clinical decision-making.

Similar content being viewed by others

Potential value of CT-based comprehensive nomogram in predicting occult lymph node metastasis of esophageal squamous cell paralaryngeal nerves: a two-center study
Article Open access
30 April 2024

Evaluation of CT-based radiomics signature and nomogram as prognostic markers in patients with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
Article Open access
22 April 2020

Radiomics analysis for the prediction of locoregional recurrence of locally advanced oropharyngeal cancer and hypopharyngeal cancer
Article 21 December 2023
Introduction
Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LHSCC) is a prevalent pair of malignant neoplasms affecting the head and neck region [1, 2]. According to the Global Cancer Statistics for 2020, newly published by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), 268,869 new cases of LHSCC have been diagnosed, and approximately 138,439 patients have died of the disease [3]. The cancer control and functional prognosis of patients with LHSCC are highly contingent upon treatment strategies. In particular, surgical decisions rely heavily on T staging [4]. In line with the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) system, early LHSCC was defined as less than or equal to T2 staging (T1 or T2), while greater than or equal to T3 staging (T3 or T4) was classified as advanced stage [5, 6]. The most common therapies recommended for early-stage LHSCC are partial laryngectomy, laser resection, or radiation therapy [7]. Because of the greater damage to the larynx with the important social functions related to vocalization, swallowing, and quality of life of afflicted patients, total laryngectomy in combination with other treatment modalities is primarily reserved for advanced-stage LHSCC [8,9,10]. Excessive evaluation may lead to total laryngectomy and subsequently affect the patient’s quality of survival, while underevaluation may heighten the risk of persistent tumor or recurrence.

Assessment of the primary tumor is initially accomplished by clinical inspection using an indirect mirror and direct endoscopic examination with a fiber optic nasolaryngoscope. Notwithstanding the utility of clinical examination in assessing the primary tumor site in LHSCC, the disease’s proclivity for submucosal spread signifies a potential limitation of this diagnostic method [11,12,13]. Therefore, even if the primary tumor has been clinically diagnosed as T1–2 staging on the basis of clinical inspection, imaging is still an important adjunct to exclude any missed T3–4 features or submucosal extension [14,15,16]. According to the AJCC, T1 staging is defined as a tumor confined to an anatomical subregion, which makes it possible to distinguish T1 from other stages. Advanced LHSCC can be recognized on the basis of the infiltration of thyroid cartilage, especially at T4 staging, and several studies have demonstrated the good diagnostic performance of CT or MRI in identifying cartilage infiltration [17, 18]. The above studies demonstrated that it is mostly feasible to distinguish T1 or T4 staging from other stages by conventional techniques. However, it is difficult to distinguish T2 from T3 staging of LHSCC by means of conventional imaging and laryngoscopy in clinical practice.

Recently, radiomics based on quantitative parameters retrieved from CT and MR images has been proven to accurately identify T-stage in a variety of tumors, including rectal [19, 20] and gastric [21] cancers and LHSCC. Guo et al [22] reported that the model based on CT radiomic features yielded a higher area under the curve (AUC) than that of radiologist assessment in the prediction of thyroid cartilage invasion in LHSCC. Wang et al [23] developed and validated a nomogram that allowed for accurate prediction of T category (T3 vs. T4) for patients with locally advanced laryngeal cancer. However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated the value of CT radiomics in distinguishing T2 from T3 staging of LHSCC.

In the present study, we hypothesized that radiomics from contrast-enhanced CT images could be applied to distinguish the T2/T3 staging of LHSCC. To test this, we extracted features from LHSCC and subsequently used different combinations of feature selection methods and machine learning algorithms to identify the most robust model. Furthermore, we developed and validated a nomogram for the preoperative prediction of the T2/T3 staging of LHSCC, which is particularly helpful for therapeutic stratification.

Materials and methods
Study population
The following criteria guided the inclusion of patients: (1) LHSCC confirmed by pathology; (2) patients who had not received tumor-related treatment prior to pathological biopsy; and (3) histopathological examination within 2 weeks after CT scanning. Patients were excluded if they met any of the following criteria: (1) incomplete CT imaging data; (2) absence of necessary clinical information (T staging data); (3) T staging: Tis, T1, T4; (4) poor CT image quality (mainly due to severe swallowing artifacts), which could not be used for image segmentation; and (5) inconspicuous or too small lesions on CT images lead to difficulties in image segmentation. The details of the patient recruitment flow are shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Flowchart of study population selection

Full size image
The demographic characteristics were collected and analyzed, including age and gender. The results of T staging were acquired from medical records, which were assessed according to the AJCC TNM Staging System Guidelines [5, 24] by an otolaryngologist. This study was approved by the institutional review board and informed consent was waived given this was a retrospective study.

Image acquisition and morphological imaging assessment
Contrast-enhanced CT images of the neck were acquired by one of the following scanners: Philips IQon spectral CT, Philips iCT256, or United-Imaging Healthcare (UIH) uCT760. The details of the scanning parameters are described in Supplementary A1.

Morphological imaging characteristics were systematically gathered by two radiologists with 5 years of work experience (reader 1, reader 2). Additional information is included in Supplementary A2. An overview of radiomic workflow is shown in Fig. 2. 

Fig. 2
figure 2
The workflow of the current study. After feature extraction, stable features were selected for further analysis. Multiple feature selection methods and classifiers were combined, and an optimal model was selected with the help of cross-validation in the training set. The subsequent performance analysis was conducted using the optimal model

Full size image
Image segmentation
The arterial phase CT images in DICOM format utilized to mark the regions of interest (ROIs) were procured from the picture archiving and communication system (PACS). The images were manually delineated and validated by reader 1 and reader 2 via 3D-Slicer (version 5.0.2, www.slicer.org); both were blinded to the pathological findings. The delineation criteria are described in Supplementary A3.

Image standardization and feature extraction
Prior to feature extraction, all images underwent standardization preprocessing. Additional information is provided in Supplementary A4. The radiomic features were then extracted from each ROI by utilizing 3D slicer software with an extended plug-in called the “PyRadiomics package” (version 3.0.1, https://www.radiomics.io/pyradiomics.html). The reproducibility of all extracted features was assessed by intra-/interclass correlation coefficients (ICCs), and features with ICCs > 0.75 considered highly reproducible were screened for subsequent analyses [25,26,27].

Feature processing
The Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric test (KW test) [28] was used to remove the features showing significant statistical differences among different scanners after feature extraction. Then, the remaining radiomic feature files (CSV format) were imported into an open-source software package named FeAture Explorer software (FAE, version 0.5.2, https://github.com/salan668/FAE) for the following processing. Firstly, the data were randomly split into a training set and a test set at a ratio of 7:3. The techniques of data balancing (synthetic minority over-sampling technique, SMOTE), standardization (Z-score), and dimensionality reduction (Pearson’s correlation coefficient, PCC) were combined to preprocess the feature data in the training set. The remaining features were selected using three different feature selection methods respectively with 1–20 target feature numbers: analysis of variance (ANOVA), recursive feature elimination (RFE), and Relief. Additional information is included in Supplementary A5.

Model construction
Classification was performed using seven machine learning algorithms based on Python code with the scikit-learn library (https://scikit-learn.org/) to identify the most robust analytic models, including the support vector machine (SVM), linear discriminant analysis (LDA), logistic regression (LR), Gaussian process (GP), auto-encoder (AE), logistic regression via lasso (Lasso-LR), and naive Bayes (NB). To demonstrate the performance of the model, this study applied five-fold cross-validation. Explanatory information is provided in Supplementary A6 and Fig. S1.

Nomogram development and validation
Univariate analysis was performed on demographic and morphological imaging characteristics, such as gender, age, tumor location, and tumor diameter.

The diagnostic performance of the model was calculated using the AUC, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV). The performance of AUC, sensitivity, and specificity was comprehensively analyzed to determine the optimal model and obtain the radiomic signature. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed for the characteristics with statistically significant differences between groups to further screen independent risk factors. The independent predictors and the radiomic signature obtained from the optimal model were combined to build a multivariable logistic model with the aim of developing a radiomic nomogram.

The Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test was performed to evaluate the calibration of the nomogram. Then, a calibration curve was plotted to compare the agreement between the predicted probability of the model and the observed probability. Decision curve analysis (DCA) describes the change of the net benefit when the intervention is carried out according to the predicted value of the model as the threshold probability changes, evaluating the clinical application value of the nomogram.

Statistical analysis
R (4.2.1 version, http://www.R-project. org) was used for statistical analysis. Measurement data such as age and diameter were tested for normality and homogeneity of variance. The measurement data conforming to a normal distribution were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation, and the independent sample t test was used. Those who did not conform to the normal distribution were expressed as the median ± interquartile range and compared by the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. For categorical variables, comparisons between groups were made with the use of the chi-square test, Yates’ correction, or Fisher’s exact test depending on the theoretical frequency of the data and the total number of samples. p values below 0.05 were set as significance level.

Results
Participant characteristics
As summarized in Table 1, a total of 118 patients were enrolled in this study according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria, including 50 patients in the T2 group (48 males and 2 females, aged 61.68 ± 9.64 years) and 68 patients in the T3 group (67 males and 1 female, aged 60.35 ± 9.19 years), which were randomly divided into a training cohort (N = 83) and a test cohort (N = 35). In most cases, the lesions were located in the glottic portion (63.6%) and had ill-defined boundaries (95.8%). There was no significant difference in gender or age between the T2 and T3 groups or the training and test sets.

Table 1 Demographic and morphological imaging characteristics of patients with LHSCC
Full size table
Additionally, there were no significant differences in the location, shape, boundary, or enhancement pattern of the tumors between the T2 and T3 groups; however, there were significant differences in suspicious metastasis of the cervical lymph node, thyroid cartilage invasion, and diameter of the tumors between the two groups. After multivariate logistic regression analysis, suspicious thyroid cartilage invasion and diameter remained significant. These variables were not significantly different between the training and test sets.

Feature extraction
The extracted features comprised 107 original image features (including 14 shape, 18 first-order, 24 gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), 14 gray-level dependence matrix (GLDM), 16 gray-level run length matrix (GLRLM), 16 gray-level size zone matrix (GLSZM), and 5 neighbouring gray tone difference matrix (NGTDM) features) and 744 features based on wavelet decomposition. Explanatory information is provided in Supplementary A7.

Of the 851 radiomics features, 627 features were demonstrated to have good inter-observer reproducibility and intra-observer reproducibility, with ICCs > 0.75.

Feature selection and model evaluation
The results of the statistical analysis based on CT scanner subgroups are shown in Table S1. After the KW nonparametric test, the remaining 513 features showing no significant differences among different scanners in the original radiomics feature set were subjected to uniform data balancing, normalization, and dimensionality reduction. Three feature selection methods and seven classifiers were combined to create various models from one to 20 radiomic features based on feature contributions. A total of 420 (3 × 7 × 20) radiomic models were automatically generated using FAE software.

By comparing the AUC values of the validation set, each feature selection method was filtered for a specific number of target features when the feature selection method demonstrated higher stability and diagnostic performance in combination with all seven classifiers. The three feature subsets were described as follows: ANOVA-10, RFE-8, and Relief-13 (the optimal number of selected features using different methods is shown after each method name). Using the three feature subsets, individual combinations of the three feature selection methods and seven classifiers showed different diagnostic performances for distinguishing T2/T3 staging of LHSCC (Fig. 3).

Fig. 3
figure 3
The heatmap illustrates the predictive performance (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, AUC) of different combinations of feature selection methods (rows) and classification algorithms (columns) in the training, validation, and test sets. ANOVA, analysis of variance; RFE, recursive feature elimination; SVM, support vector machine; LDA, linear discriminant analysis; LR, logistic regression; GP, Gaussian process; AE, auto-encoder; Lasso-LR, logistic regression via lasso; NB, naive Bayes

Full size image
The radiomic model with the ANOVA-LR combination was the optimal model, with AUCs of 0.919 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.860–0.978), 0.857 (95% CI 0.778–0.936), and 0.817 (95% CI 0.660–0.973) in the training, validation, and test sets, respectively (Fig. 4). The feature contributions and coefficients are shown in Table 2, and the outcomes of predictability across sets are shown in Table 3.

Fig. 4
figure 4
ROC curves from the optimal model. CV Training: the average result of training datasets in the five-fold cross-validation. Validation: the average result of validation datasets in the five-fold cross-validation. Training: the result of training set. Testing: the result of test set. CV, cross-validation

Full size image
Table 2 The coefficients of radiomics features in the optimal model
Full size table
Table 3 Outcomes of ANOVA-LR model predictability
Full size table
Nomogram construction
Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that thyroid cartilage invasion and tumor diameter remained significant. Explanatory information is provided in Table S2.

The radiomic signature and thyroid cartilage invasion regarded as predictors of the T staging (T2/T3) of LHSCC were included in the construction of the nomogram (Fig. 5). Satisfactory predictive performances of the nomogram were obtained with a C-index of 0.899 (95% CI 0.843–0.955). The calibration curve demonstrated optimal agreement between the predicted probabilities computed by the nomogram and actual observations among the two patient cohorts (Fig. 6A, B). DCA (Fig. 6C, D) showed that the clinical “net benefit” was higher with this model than with the default strategy of treating all or no patients.

Fig. 5
figure 5
A nomogram predicting the risk of T3 for patients with T2/T3 stages. The value of each variable was given a score on the point scale axis. The total score can be calculated by adding each individual score, and the total score can be projected into the lower total score scale, that is, the probability of T3 can be estimated

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure 6
Calibration curve and decision analysis curve of the nomogram in the training set (A, C) and test set (B, D): A, B The X-axis is the nomogram-predicted probability of T3 staging. The Y-axis is the observed T3 staging, and the diagonal dashed line indicates the ideal prediction by a perfect model. C, D The abscissa represents the threshold probability, and the ordinate represents the net benefit. All: the net benefit of assuming that all patients are T3 staging. None: the net benefit of assuming no patient is T3 staging. Predicted probability: expected net benefit based on the predictive nomogram

Full size image
Discussion
In the present study, we used three feature selection methods and seven machine learning algorithms to identify the most robust analytic model based on contrast-enhanced CT images for identifying the T2/T3 staging of LHSCC. Our study found that the ANOVA-LR combination obtained the optimal model with high diagnostic performance in the training, test, and validation sets. Furthermore, we developed and assessed a nomogram incorporating the radiomic signature and morphological imaging characteristics evaluated by radiologists, which provides a non-invasive and robust approach for preoperatively personalized identification of the T2/T3 staging of patients with LHSCC.

The appropriate treatment strategy that highly depends on accurate preoperative T staging is closely related to the life quality and survival rate of LHSCC patients [29,30,31]. Medical imaging plays a significant role in the staging of LHSCC, particularly in distinguishing the absence or presence of laryngeal cartilage invasion and extralaryngeal spread [24, 32, 33]. Furthermore, radiomics is a quantitative analysis method that uses a large number of algorithms to transform ROIs in medical images into high-dimensional features [34]. In this study, 851 features from contrast-enhanced CT images were extracted based on different filters, and a radiomic signature composed of ten features after feature processing was established. The stable features related to LHSCC were retained, including one original shape feature and nine wavelet transforming features, which may indicate that wavelet transform acquiring multifrequency domain and multiscale image information may amplify the heterogeneity information of texture features in medical images to some extent so that it is beneficial to the T staging of LHSCC. Our results are consistent with the findings of previous studies [35,36,37] that the prediction model based on wavelet transform features performs well in radiomic analysis.

Unlike the specific modalities selected in previous radiomic studies [22, 23], the three feature selection methods and seven classifiers were combined to create various models from one to 20 radiomic features based on feature contributions, and a total of 420 (3 × 7 × 20) radiomic models were automatically generated using FAE software in this study. As different feature selection methods and modelling algorithms have their own advantages and disadvantages, it is necessary to compare the performance of various modelling combinations to determine the optimal machine learning pipeline in radiomic studies. The optimal feature subset with the strongest correlation to T2/T3 staging was determined during the modelling process, and the optimal model was selected by comparing their diagnostic performance. Ultimately, the optimal model was based on ANOVA as the feature selector and LR as the classifier in our study. Previous studies [38] have shown that ANOVA appears to be a good choice for radiomic studies in terms of predictive performance, as it outperformed most other feature selection methods. The LR classifier is suitable for small samples and is one of the most commonly used binary classification algorithms in radiomics. It has also been used to construct models for other tumors and achieved satisfactory performance in previous studies [39, 40].

In the statistical analysis of demographic and morphological imaging characteristics, this study found that the differences in suspicious thyroid cartilage invasion and diameter on CT images between the T2 and T3 groups were statistically significant. In line with the staging criteria for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer, the determination of thyroid cartilage invasion and the assessment of tumor diameter are important indicators for clinical staging [24]. However, due to the similarity between the diameter assessed by radiologists and the radiomic feature of the original shape-maximum 2D diameter, only thyroid cartilage invasion as a predictor was incorporated into the final predictive model. In addition, considering that ROC only focuses on the overall sensitivity and specificity and does not pay attention to the relationship between benefits and risks brought by different cut points in different models, DCA was introduced to evaluate the clinical utility of the nomogram [41], which shows that the clinical “net benefit” was higher with this model than with the default strategy of treating all or no patients.

The limitations of this study should be considered. First, as a single-center retrospective study, it is susceptible to potential selection bias. Second, the ROIs only outlined the largest slice of solid tumors in LHSCC patients, which could not completely represent the characteristics of the whole tumors, and there may be slice selection bias. Multislice analysis will be considered in the next study to provide more comprehensive information. Third, three different CT scanners were used for image acquisition. Although we performed standardized preprocessing to eliminate the effects of inconsistent imaging parameters on radiomic features as much as possible, it cannot be completely excluded. However, it reflects the actual state of heterogeneity of imaging parameters in clinical practice [42]. Hence, for clinical applications, our predictive model may have better generalization performance. Finally, a direct comparison between arterial and venous phase models could not be made due to the absence of venous phase images of certain patients in our data, which is also the next research direction after we accumulate more cases in the future. In addition, the absence of a model comparison to an expert radiologist’s assessment is due to the specificity that T staging of LHSCC is based on the involvement of various subsites and vocal cord mobility, which relies on the combination of clinical laryngoscopy, imaging, and pathology information [5, 24]. Especially, vocal cord mobility is an important indicator of LHSCC T-staging and can only be observed by laryngoscopy.

In summary, the radiomics nomogram based on contrast-enhanced CT achieves satisfactory preoperative prediction of the individualized risk assessment of T2/T3 staging and provides a straightforward and non-invasive approach for assisting surgeons in therapeutic decision-making, which may promote personalized therapeutic regimens for LHSCC patients.

Abbreviations
AE:
Auto-encoder

AJCC:
American Joint Committee on Cancer

ANOVA:
Analysis of variance

AUC:
Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve

CI:
Confidence interval

CT:
Computed tomography

DCA:
Decision curve analysis

FAE:
FeAture Explorer software

GLCM:
Gray-level co-occurrence matrix

GLDM:
Gray-level dependence matrix

GLRLM:
Gray-level run length matrix

GLSZM:
Gray-level size zone matrix

GP:
Gaussian process

HU:
Hounsfield units

IARC:
International Agency for Research on Cancer

ICCs:
Intra- /interclass correlation coefficients

KW:
Kruskal-Wallis

Lasso-LR:
Logistic regression via lasso

LDA:
Linear discriminant analysis

LHSCC:
Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma

LR:
Logistic regression

NB:
Naive Bayes

NGTDM:
Neighboring gray tone difference matrix

NNs:
Neural networks

NPV:
Negative predictive value

PACS:
Picture archiving and communication system

PCC:
Pearson’s correlation coefficient

PPV:
Positive predictive value

RFE:
Recursive feature elimination

ROI:
Region of interest

SMOTE:
Synthetic minority over-sampling technique

SVM:
Support vector machine

TNM:
Tumor-node-metastasis

